A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
941 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS.
v.
ISRO DRIVERS ASSOCIATION 
(Civil Appeal No. 7138 of 2010) 
AUGUST 10, 2020 
[SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, AJAY RASTOGI AND 
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, JJ.]
Central Civil Services (Recognition of Service Asso ciation) 
Rules, 1993: 
rr. 5(c) and 5(d)(i) – Service Association – Based on the j ob 
description (drivers) – By the employees of Departmen t of Space – 
Recognition under the Rules – Permissibility – Held:  1993 Rules 
are applicable to Government Servants to whom Centr al Civil 
Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964 are applicable – Dep artment of 
Space has its own service rules – The Service Rules of Dep artment 
of Space classify the civil posts broadly under four group s viz. ‘A’, 
‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ – Employees of different job descr iption fall in 
different groups based on their pay scale and job description – The 
scheme of 1993 Rules shows that its intention is to avoid p lurality 
of associations – The classification of the posts in g roup ‘A’, ‘B’, 
‘C’ and ‘D’ categories is a ‘distinct category’ – Further classification 
of posts based on job description is not permissible under recruitment 
and conduct rules and the same if permitted under t he guise of 
expression ‘distinct category’, would defeat the obj ect with which 
the scheme of 1993 Rules have been framed – Department of Space
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1976. 
Allowing the appeal, the Court
HELD: 1. As per the scheme of Rules 1993, it is applicabl e 
to such Government servants to whom the Central Civil Servi ces
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 are applicable. The Department of Spa ce 
framed its own disciplinary rules regarding alleged mi sconduct
being committed by the employees for holding discip linary 
inquiries under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution, namely,
the Department of Space (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules,
1976 was further amended in the year 2013. Annexed the reto,
schedule has been appended to Rule 30 prescribing t he 
[2020] 7 S.C.R. 941 
941

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
942 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R.
classification of Civil Posts under the Department of Space broadly 
in four Groups ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’. The employees  who are 
working in SDSC SHAR i.e. technical attendants, nur sing 
attendants, technicians, office attendants, gardeners, sa faiwalas,
security guards, canteen attendants, radiographers, pharmacis ts,
lab technicians, nurses, agricultural supervisors, drivers,
stenographers etc. are falling in different groups based on their 
pay scales and job description etc. [Para 23] [954-F-H][955-A] 
2. There are two different set of recruitment rules.  One 
set of recruitment rules have been framed by Department of Space 
for drivers in exercise of powers conferred under proviso to Article 
309 of the Constitution called as Department of Space (Staf f Car 
Drivers/Light Vehicle Drivers) Recruitment Rules, 2 001 
classified drivers in Group ‘C’ post. For the other  category of 
posts of Assistant, Senior Project Assistant, Personn el Assistant 
and Private Secretary, their recruitment is regulated by the Rules 
called the Department of Space (Group ‘B’ Posts) Recr uitment 
Rules, 2009 and with partial modification, the meth od of 
recruitment and designation to the post of Assistant (Gr oup ‘B’ 
non-gazetted) called the Department of Space (Assis tant) 
Recruitment Rules, 2016.  At some stages, for other p urposes,
categorization of posts have been made indicating minis terial,
non-ministerial, industrial and non-industrial, tenur e posts but 
broadly under the scheme of recruitment rules, the service 
conditions of employees have been broadly classifie d in four 
groups A,B,C & D. [Para 24][955-A-D] 
3. The primary object of forming service association is t o 
promote the common service interest of its members and the 
membership of the service association remain restricted  to such 
Government servants having common interest and all group of 
employees covered under the existing JCM scheme wer e 
categorized as a ‘distinct category’ for forming their associ ation.
At the same time, if association/Union is being exc lusively 
permitted to be formed by the group of employees based on j ob 
description in the organization such as drivers, ste nographers,
etc. apart from various category of employees who are working 
in SDSC SHAR i.e. technical attendants, nursing att endants,

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
943 
technicians, office attendants, radiographers, etc. for the pur pose 
of recognition under the scheme of Rules 1993 treating th em to 
be a ‘distinct category’ as considered by the Divisi on Bench in 
the impugned judgment, there is a greater probability  that the 
employees of each of the above mentioned trades/jobs would fo rm 
into association in each of the centres/units qualifying th emselves 
into ‘distinct category’ and seek representation in JCM that would 
not only defeat the purpose of JCM but would lead to group ism 
obstructing the working atmosphere and neither joint consultation 
nor consensus would prevail and that will jeopardize th e service 
interest of the government servants. [Para 29][956-C-F]
4. It has come on record that presently the strength of t he 
staff working in various groups is over 16,000. In the given 
situation, if any group of employees based on their job description 
is permitted to form an association under the guise o f ‘distinct 
category’ as prayed, it will indeed have an adverse consequ ential 
effect which would never be the intention of the ru le making 
authority while framing the scheme of Rules 1993. Rule 5(d) lays 
down that subsequent association with less than 35%  of total 
number of categories can be recognized if it commands at leas t 
15% of the membership. The respondent confining its elf to 
drivers as members cannot command 15% of the total number of 
employees covered by the scheme in SDSC SHAR as the
sanctioned strength of the drivers (around 160) is less  than 15% 
of the members under the scheme, as a distinct cate gory 
considering the Group of employees (A,B,C & D) resp ectively. 
[Para 30][956-G-H][957-A-B] 
5. The Latin maxim ‘noscitur a sociis’  states this contextual 
principle, whereby a word or phrase is not to be construed  as if it 
stood alone but in the light of its surroundings. A word or phrase 
in an enactment must always be construed in the lig ht of the 
surrounding text.  Words and particular general words,  cannot 
be read in isolation, their colour and their content ar e derived 
from their context. [Para 31][957-B-C] 
A-G Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover [1957] AC 436 
– referred to. 
Bennion on Statutory Interpretation, Fifth Edition  – referred 
to. 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
944 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R.
6. The scheme of Rules 1993 clearly manifests that the 
primary object of the scheme is to promote the common se rvice 
interest of its members and service association whic h intends to 
accord recognition must represent minimum 35% of the  total 
category of employees with a rider that where there is on ly one 
association which commands more than 35% membership a nd 
another association with second highest membership must be 
recognized if it commands at least 15% membership. The intention 
appears to be to avoid plurality of associations which indeed  may 
not be in the overall interest of the Government se rvants in 
forming service association on their job descriptio n. In this 
context, the expression ‘distinct category of gover nment 
servants’ referred under Rule 5 (c) with its due em phasis in 
furtherance of the clarification which has been made by th e rule 
making authority is, in fact, supplementing the scheme of  rules 
for its effective and proper implementation which is pe rmissible 
under the law unless held to the contrary and that was never the 
case of the respondent at any stage in grouping the class ification 
of posts in group ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ as a ‘distinct cate gory’, is 
in contravention to Rule 5 (c ) of Rules 1993 and any further  sub- 
classification of posts based on job description is not permissible 
under the recruitment and conduct rules if permitted under the 
guise of expression ‘distinct category’ to form service as sociation, 
it would defeat the purpose and object with which the scheme of 
Rules 1993 have been framed according recognition to s ervice 
association which has been primarily formed with an ob ject of 
promoting the common service interests of its members at l arge 
and the literal interpretation in isolation of the t erm ‘distinct 
category’ made by the Division Bench of the High Court in the 
impugned judgment granting permission to each group  of 
employees based on job description/trade to claim r ecognition 
and form their service association would not only d efeat the 
primary object of the scheme of Rules 1993 but the purpose  as 
well with which the Joint Consultative Machinery has been formed 
to watch albeit the common service interest of its members/ 
Government servants. [Para 32][957-D-H; 958-A-B]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
945 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 7138 
of 2010.
From the Judgment and Order dated 22.09.2008 of the High Court
of  Andhra Pradesh, at Hyderabad in Writ Appeal No. 1914 of 2001.
Vikramjeet Banerjee, ASG, Ms. Sunita Rani Singh, Ms. Shruti
Agarwal, Raj Bahadur Yadav, Advs. for the Appellants.
Shekhar G. Devasa (for M/s. Devasa & Co.), Advs. for the 
Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
RASTOGI, J. 
1. The instant appeal is directed against the order and judgment
dated 22 nd  September, 2008 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad holding the association formed 
by the drivers based on job description as a ‘distinct category’ laid down 
under Rule 5 (c) of Central Civil Services (Recognition of S ervice 
Association) Rules, 1993 (hereinafter being referred to as “Rules 1993”) 
overruling the view expressed by the Single Bench of the High  Court
dated 9 th  October, 2001.
2. The seminal facts in brief which are relevant for the  present
purpose are that the respondent approached the High Court by filing a 
writ petition seeking a declaration in treating their association comprising 
of drivers operating in appellant no. 4-Shar Centre a Unit of ISRO, Nellore 
District, Andhra Pradesh eligible to participate in the verification process 
by according recognition and rejection of their application by order dated 
29 th  June, 1999 on the premise that association formed by a group  of 
employees based on job description will not qualify for recognition under 
Rules 1993 is in contravention to Rule 5 (c) which is not sustainable in 
law.
3. Learned Single Judge of the High Court taking note of the 
scheme of Rules 1993 and R5(c) & R10 in particular with later Office 
Memorandum dated 22 nd  April, 1994 of the Government of India, Ministry 
of Personnel P.G. & Pension read with decision of the Depart ment of 
Space dated 30 th  May, 1996 arrived at the conclusion that the object of 
the scheme is to protect the common interest of the employees  of the 
establishment and the respondent represents only the interests of drivers 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
946 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R.
but the association must have a collective voice of all the groups for the 
purpose of recognition and after the expression ‘distinct ca tegory’ as 
referred to under R5(c) being explicitly clarified by the Department of 
Personnel and Training (DOPT) and Department of Spa ce, any 
association formed on the basis of job description or trade will not qualify 
to accord recognition and later communication dated 22 nd  April, 1994 is 
supplementing the scheme of Rules 1993 for its proper implementation 
in fulfilment of the object with which the scheme has been framed and 
there appears no apparent error in the decision of the authority rejecting 
their claim seeking recognition in forming the association representing 
interest of the drivers based on job description not being covered under 
the scheme of Rules 1993 dismissed the writ petition by its judgment and 
order dated 9 th  October, 2001 which came to be challenged by the 
respondent in writ appeal.
4. While revisiting the indisputed facts on record, the Div ision 
Bench was of the view that the term ‘distinct category’  defined under 
Rule 5 (c) is not open to be clarified by the DOPT and wi th its literal
interpretation held the association of drivers as a ‘distinct category’ and 
accordingly directed the appellants to examine whether the respondent
satisfy other pre-conditions of the scheme and, thereafter, take a decision 
subjected to the verification process for being accorded recognition under 
the Rules 1993. The appellants being aggrieved by the order and judgment
of the Division Bench impugned dated 22 nd  September, 2008 came up in 
appeal before us.
5. Mr. Vikramjeet Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General
submits that the expression ‘distinct category’ as referred to under Rule 
5 (c ) of the Rules 1993 has not been defined and that was the r eason 
the rule making authority visited the scheme and by its clarificatory memo 
dated 22 nd  April, 1994, had entrusted this responsibility to concerned 
Ministry/Department to take a decision keeping in view the functional,
administrative and organizational set up. In furtherance ther eof, the 
Department of Space held its meeting in April 1994 with all the service 
associations and except the respondent, other associations agree d that
all the employees covered by the Joint Consultative Machinery scheme 
of the Department should be treated as single categ ory and any 
association/Union exclusively formed by certain group of employe es 
based on job description in the organization such as drivers, stenographers,
tradesmen, etc. would not qualify for recognition under the Rules 1993.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
947 
Taking note of the overall view of the functional, administ rative and 
organizational set up of the Department, a letter was issued to the centres/
units on 30 th  May, 1996 to call for application of service association who
wished to be recognized under the scheme of Rules and it was clarified 
by the Department that the term ‘distinct category’ as defi ned under 
Rule 5(c) will constitute all the employees in the particular region and 
not a cluster of employees based on job or trade descript ion like the 
members of the respondent, all of whom were drivers, did not constitute 
a ‘distinct category’ of government servants and were rightly held not
entitled for recognition.
6. Learned counsel further submits that while the rules are framed 
under proviso to Article 309 read with clause 5 of Articl e 148 of the 
Constitution which indeed cannot be supplanted but the administrative 
circulars could, nonetheless, be issued to supplement the Rules and the 
unoccupied gaps of the Rules could be filled, the express ion ‘distinct
category’ not being defined in the Rules has been clarifi ed by the 
Department of Personnel by its clarificatory memo dated 22 nd  April,
1994 to promote harmonious relations and securing cooperation between 
the Government and its employees in matters of common concern and 
with the object of promoting common service interest of its employees 
being the primary object with which the scheme of Rules 1993 we re 
framed.
7. Learned counsel further submits that once a clarification was 
made of the expression ‘distinct category’ as referred to under Rule 
5 (c) by the rule making authority taking recourse to Rule 10 of Rules 
1993, the manner in which the expression ‘distinct category’ has been 
examined by the Division Bench of the High Court by taking its literary 
meaning borrowed from the Dictionary is not legally sustai nable and 
deserves to be interfered by this Court.
8. Per contra, Mr. Shekhar G. Devasa, learned counsel for the 
respondent, on the other hand, while supporting the finding recorded in
the  impugned judgment submits that as long as the respondent fulfil the 
pre-conditions for recognition as envisaged under the scheme of Rules 
1993, it was not open for the appellants to take aid or assi stance and 
place reliance on the Office Memorandum dated 22 nd  April, 1994 or 30 th 
May, 1996 to deny their claim which has been conferred on them under 
the statutory rules framed under proviso to Article 309 read with clause 
5 of Article 148 of the Constitution of India.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION [AJAY RASTOGI, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
948 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R. 
9. Learned counsel further submits that they had formed their
association with the object of common service interest of th e drivers 
employed in Unit ISRO and remain restricted to a ‘distinct category’ of 
Government servants, i.e., drivers all of whom had a common inte rest 
and were eligible to be members of their association and  representing 
120 out of 150 drivers of ISRO Unit and more than 3 5% of the 
membership required and nature of duties discharged by the drivers in 
ISRO being distinct from the duties discharged by employees working in 
other categories of posts, were rightly held to be eligible for recognition 
under Rules 1993. 
10. Learned counsel further submits that the test to determ ine a 
‘distinct category of government servants’ was homog eneity and 
commonality of interest which is being fulfilled by the as sociation of 
drivers which had a commonality of interest, and was a homoge nous 
group and entitled for recognition as an association exclusively of drivers 
and this what has been examined by the Division Bench of the Hi gh 
Court in the impugned judgment extensively taking note of the scheme 
and in the absence of any express prohibition under the scheme in having 
a number of associations, it would justify claim of the first respondent of 
their right to be recognized as a service association under the scheme of 
Rules 1993 and needs no interference of this Court. 
11. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their 
assistance perused the material available on record. 
12. The question that emerges is whether “the association formed 
on the basis of job description such as drivers etc. whi ch has been 
classified in group ‘C’ constitute a ‘distinct category of Government 
servants’ under Rule 5 (c) of Rules 1993". 
13. With the object of promoting harmonious relations and securing 
cooperation between the Government and its employees in the matters 
of common concern and to increase efficiency of public ser vice, the 
Government of India established in 1966 the Machiner y for Joint 
Consultation and Arbitration. The Joint Consultative Machinery Scheme 
was introduced at the national level and at two lower levels , namely, 
departmental and regional/office level. The Joint Councils operate with 
the official members and staff members. The staff m embers are 
represented by recognized service association of Government servants 
belonging to Group C & Group D and Group B (non-gazetted staff) .

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
949 
Recognition of service associations for the purpose of representation in 
the Joint Councils of JCM is to be carried out in accor dance with the 
Central Civil Services (Recognition of Service Association) Rules, 1959 
which were superseded by the Rules 1993 by a notification dat ed 5 th 
November, 1993. 
14. The Department of Space under the Government of India 
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 formulated its own scheme of JCM 
in 1977 with the object of promoting harmonious relations and securing 
cooperation between the Department and its employees. As per the 
scheme of JCM, all Group C & D employees and Group B (non-gazetted 
staff) working in the Department of Space are eligible for participation 
in the scheme. After the notification of the Rules 1993, the Department 
of Space decided to implement these rules in respect of the JCM Scheme. 
15. In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 
309 and clause (5) of Article 148 of the Constitution and in supersession 
of the Central Civil Services (Recognition of Service Associations) Rules, 
1959, Rules 1993 have been framed. The rules relevant for the purpose 
are extracted hereunder:- 
“In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 
309 and clause (5) of article 148 of the Constituti on, after 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General in relation 
to persons serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department, 
and in supersession of the Central Civil Services (Recognition of 
Service Associations) Rules, 1959 except as respects things done 
or omitted to be done before such supersession, the Presiden t 
hereby makes the following rules, namely: 
1.    …….. 
2.   ……… 
3. Application :  These rules shall apply to Service 
Associations of all Government servants including civilian 
Government servants in the Defence Services but shall not 
apply to industrial employees of the Ministry of Railways 
and workers employed in Defence Installations of Ministry 
of Defence for whom separate Rules of Recognition exist. 
4.  ........ 
5.  Conditions for recognition of Service Associations :
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION [AJAY RASTOGI, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
950 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R. 
A Service Association which fulfills the following conditions may 
be recognised by the Government, namely:- 
(a) An application for recognition of Service Association has
been made to the Government containing Memorandum of 
Association, Constitution, Bye-laws of the Association, Names 
of Office-Bearers, total membership and any other information 
as may be required by the Government; 
b) the Service Association has been formed primarily
with the object of promoting the common service interest 
of its members ;
(c) membership of the Service Association has been restricted 
to a distinct category  of Government servants having common 
interest, all such Government servants’ being eligible f or 
membership of the Service Association; 
d) (i) The Association represents minimum 35 per cent 
of total number of a category of employees provided that 
where there is only one Association which commands 
more than 35 per cent membership, another Association 
with second highest membership, although less than 35 
per cent may be recognised if it commands at least 15 
per cent membership ;
(ii)  The membership of the Government servant shall be 
automatically discontinued on his ceasing to belong to such 
category; 
(e) Government employees who are in service shall be members 
or office bearers of the service Association; 
(f)-(h)….. 
6-9 ….. 
10. Interpretation: 
If any question arises as to the interpretation of any of the 
provisions of these rules or if there is any dispute relati ng to 
fulfilment of conditions for recognition it shall be referred to the 
Government, whose decision thereon shall be final. 
(J.C. Mathur) 
       Joint Secretary to the Govt of India”

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
951 
16. These rules apply to service associations of all Gove rnment 
servants referred to under Rule 3 to be formed primarily with an object 
of promoting the common service interest of its members and it may be 
noticed that the expression ‘distinct category’ referred to under clause 
(c) of Rule 5 has not been defined under the scheme of Rules 1993. 
17. R5(d)(i) defines the membership of service association who 
can be granted recognition has been restricted to a ‘distinct category of 
Government servants’ having common service interest and repre sents 
35% of total number of category of employees with a proviso that where 
there is only one association which commands more t han 35% 
membership, another association may be recognized if it commands at 
least 15% membership and this clearly indicates that the rule  making 
authority intended to avoid plurality of service associations with an object 
to promote the common service interest of all the group of employees/ 
Government servants. 
18. Since certain doubts were raised by the persons  for 
implementation of the scheme of Rules 1993,  Ministry of Personnel
P.G. & Pension (Department of Personnel & Training), Government of 
India vide Office Memorandum dated 22 nd  April, 1994 (Annexure P-2) 
made a clarification and invited attention to all the Ministries/Departments 
and so far as expression ‘distinct category’ as referred t o under Rule 
5(c) is concerned, the doubt was whether the term ‘distinc t category’ 
means group wise categorization i.e. group ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ or 
cadre-wise categorization and what will be the effect of 35% of minimum 
membership of employees as referred to under 5(d) and the clarification 
was made by the DOPT  for implementation of the Rules 1993 in granting 
recognition to the service association. 
19. Relevant part of the Office Memorandum dated 22 nd  April, 
1994 is as follows:- 
“No. 2/2/94-JCA 
Government of India 
Ministry of Personnel P.G. & Pension 
(Department of Personnel & Training) 
New Delhi the 22nd April 1994 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION [AJAY RASTOGI, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
952 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R. 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
Subject: Clarification regarding Central Civil Serv ice 
(Recognition of Service Associations) Rule 1993 
The undersigned is directed to invite attention of all 
Ministries/Departments to the Central Civil Service s 
(Recognition of Service Associations) Rules, 1992, (hereinafter 
referred to as the Rules), which were notified in Nove mber, 1993 
and to this Department’s O.M. of even number dated 31 st  January 
1994 and to say that a large number of references’ are being 
received in this Department seeking clarification conc erning the 
above-mentioned Recognition Rules. With a view to avoid further 
references and to expedite matters, the common points of  doubt 
have been compiled and clarified below for informatio n of all 
Ministries/ Departments. 
POINTS OF DOUBT CLARIFICATION 
1. Whether the Rules are applicable to casual 
labourers, extra-Departmental agents, 
Contingent paid staff, industrial employees 
working in Telecom factories. 
No. The Rules are applicable only to those 
Central Government employees to whom 
the CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964 apply. 
2. Whether a Federation or Confederation of 
Associations can be recognised under the Rules. 
These Rules do not relate to a 
Federation/Confederation of Associations 
and as such, they cannot be recognised 
under the present Rules. 
3. Whether the term “distinct category” used in 
Rule 5(c) means group wise categorization 
i.e. group ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ or ‘D’ or cadrewise 
categorization. 
BY a distinct category is meant an 
Association whose members have a 
commonality of interest and function as 
homogenous group. The responsibility 
for defining a distinct category” has 
been left to the concerned Ministry/ 
Department. 
4. Whether the first two associations are to be 
recognized even in neither of them fulfills the 
conditions of having the minimum 
membership of 35%. 
No filment of the condition prescribed 
in Rule 5 (d) (i) _____ before. In other 
words, one association, that is the first 
association, must have 35% 
membership between the second 
association with minimum of 15% 
membership can be recognized. 
5. Whether Association are to be recognized 
centrally or zone/circle/region wise. 
The Associations are to be recognized 
centrally on all ministry/Department basis 
such associations may have their branches 
in the subordinate formulations. 
6. Whether the minimum membership 
prescribed in Rule 5(d)(i) is for the entire 
Department or zone/circle/regionwise etc. 
The condition of minimum membership 
as laid down in Rule 5(d)(i) is for the 
entire Department. In other words, an 
Associations must have the minimum  
percentage of members amongst all 
employees in that distinct category in 
that Department.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
953 
(BIR DATT) 
Director (JCA)” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
20. The Department of Space, taking assistance from  the 
clarification made by the DOPT vide OM dated 22 nd  April, 1994 held its 
meeting with all the service associations except the respondent agreed 
that all the employees covered by the JCM scheme of the De partment 
should be treated as single category and any associati on or Union 
exclusively formed by certain group of employees based on job description 
in the organization such as drivers, stenographers, tradesmen, etc. would 
not qualify for recognition under the Rules 1993 in the Departme nt of 
Space. 
21. In furtherance thereof, Department of Space issued Offic e 
Memorandum dated 30 th  May, 1996 to implement the scheme of Rules 
1993 for recognition of service association under the JCM Scheme. 
“3. Condition for recognition of Service Associations  for 
Recognition 
3. 1 A Service Association, which following conditions, will be 
considered for recognition under DOS JCM Scheme: 
(a) An application for recognition of Service Association has been 
made to the Government containing Memorandum of Association, 
Constitution, Bye-laws of the Association, Names of Of fice- 
Bearers, total membership and any other information as may be 
required by the Government; 
(b) The Service Association has been formed primarily with the 
object of promoting the common service interest of its members; 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION [AJAY RASTOGI, J.] 
7. Whether an Association having fulfilled the 
conditions of Rules 5(d)(i) in the entire 
Department must also have the minimum 
membership as prescribed in Rule 5(d)(i) in 
each of its branches. 
No 
8. Whether vacant posts will be taken into 
account for the purpose of calculating 
minimum membership. 
Percentage of membership is to be 
determined on the number of 
employees in each distinct category and 
not on the number of posts. 
9-12 …………

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
954 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R. 
(c) (i) Membership of the Service Association has been restricted 
to a distinct/category of Government servants having com mon 
interest, all such Government servants being eligible for membership 
of the Service Association; 
(ii) So far as Department of space is concerned, all gr oups of 
employees covered under the existing JCM scheme shall be treated 
as a single category in each region. 
(d) Only Government employees who are in service shall b e 
members or office bearers of the Service Association; 
….” 
3.2 An Association to be recognised should have a minimum 
representation of 351 of the total number of eligible employees 
in the region, provided that where there is only one Association 
which commands more than 35% membership, another Association 
with second highest membership, although less than 35% may be 
recognised, if it commands at least 15% membership. Percentage 
of membership has to be determined on the number of eligi ble 
employees in the region and not on the number of posts.” 
22. The application submitted by the first respondent seek ing 
recognition of association based on job description of drivers came to be 
rejected by the 4 th  appellant by communication dated 21 st  June, 1999 on 
the premise that the association has been exclusively formed by a group 
of employees comprising of drivers on job description would not qualify 
for recognition under Rules 1993. 
23. As per the scheme of Rules 1993, it is applicable to such 
Government servants to whom the Central Civil Services (Conduct) 
Rules, 1964 are applicable. The Department of Space frame d its own 
disciplinary rules regarding alleged misconduct being committed by the 
employees for holding disciplinary inquiries under proviso to Article 309 
of the Constitution, namely, the Department of Space (Clas sification, 
Control & Appeal) Rules, 1976 was further amended in the year 2013. 
Annexed thereto, schedule has been appended to Rule 30 prescribi ng 
the classification of Civil Posts under the Department of Space broadly 
in four Groups ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’. The employees who are working in 
SDSC SHAR i.e. technical attendants, nursing attendants, technicians, 
office attendants, gardeners, safaiwalas, security g uards, canteen 
attendants, radiographers, pharmacists, lab technicians, nurses, agricultural

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
955 
supervisors, drivers, stenographers etc. are falling in differ ent groups 
based on their pay scales and job description etc. 
24. That apart, two different set of recruitment rules have been 
placed for perusal. One set of recruitment rules have been framed by 
Department of Space for drivers in exercise of powers conferred under 
proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution called as Department of Space 
(Staff Car Drivers/Light Vehicle Drivers) Recruitment Rules, 2001 
classified drivers in Group ‘C’ post. For the other category of posts of 
Assistant, Senior Project Assistant, Personnel Assista nt and Private 
Secretary, their recruitment is regulated by the Ru les called the 
Department of Space (Group ‘B’ Posts) Recruitment Rules , 2009 and 
with partial modification, the method of recruitment and designation to 
the post of Assistant (Group ‘B’ non-gazetted) called the Department of 
Space (Assistant) Recruitment Rules, 2016. At some stages , for other 
purposes, categorization of posts have been made indicating ministerial, 
non-ministerial, industrial and non-industrial, tenure posts but broadly 
under the scheme of recruitment rules, the service c onditions of 
employees have been broadly classified in four groups A,B,C & D of 
which a reference has been made supra. 
25. In compliance of the scheme of Rules, applications were invited 
from various associations in SDSC, SHAR for according recognition. It 
has come on record that four associations/Unions wh o represent 
combination of group of employees and who fulfil the requirement  to 
participate in the verification process for recognition under the rules 
submitted their applications:- 
1. SHAR Employees Association (SEA) 
2. SHAR Employees Trade Union (SETU) 
3. SHAR Employees Union (SEU) 
4. SHAR Antariksh Staff Association (SASA) 
26. Out of the above four Associations/Unions, three participated 
in the process of verification held on 10 th  January, 2002.  The results of 
verification of membership in SHAR Centre is as follows:- 
1. Total number of employees eligible to participat e in the 
verification process in SHAR Centre                       1207 
2. Number of employees who actually participate in the 
verification process    1105 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION [AJAY RASTOGI, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
956 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R. 
27. The breakup of the numbers of letters of Authorization (i.e. 
number of employees who subscribed for each association) received on 
10 th  January, 2002 as a result of the verification of membership is given 
below :- 
1. SHAR Employees Association (SEA) 651 
2. SHAR Employees Trade Union (SETU) 327 
3. SHAR Antariksh Staff Association (SASA) 124 
28. As per the scheme of Rules 1993, service associations – SEA 
and SETU got the required membership and accordingly recognition
was accorded. 
29. The primary object of forming service association is to promote 
the common service interest of its members and the membership of the 
service association remain restricted to such Government servants having 
common interest and all group of employees covered under the existing 
JCM scheme were categorized as a ‘distinct category’ for forming their 
association. At the same time, if association/Union is being exclusively 
permitted to be formed by the group of employees based on job description 
in the organization such as drivers, stenographers, etc. apart from various 
category of employees who are working in SDSC SHAR i.e. technical 
attendants, nursing attendants, technicians, office  attendants, 
radiographers, etc. for the purpose of recognition under the scheme of
Rules 1993 treating them to be a ‘distinct category’ as considered by the 
Division Bench in the impugned judgment, there is a greater probability 
that the employees of each of the above mentioned trades/j obs would 
form into association in each of the centres/units qualifying themselves 
into ‘distinct category’ and seek representation in JCM that would not 
only defeat the purpose of JCM but would lead to groupism obstructing 
the working atmosphere and neither joint consultation nor con sensus 
would prevail and that will jeopardize the service interest of the 
government servants. 
30. It has come on record that presently the strength of the st aff 
working in various groups is over 16,000.  In the given situation, if any 
group of employees based on their job description is permitted to form 
an association under the guise of ‘distinct category’ as prayed, it will 
indeed have an adverse consequential effect which would never be the 
intention of the rule making authority while framing the scheme of Rules 
1993. Our view is being strengthened noticing Rule 5 (d) whic h lays

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
957 
down that subsequent association with less than 35% of total number of 
categories can be recognized if it commands at least  15% of the 
membership. The respondent confining itself to drivers as me mbers 
cannot command 15% of the total number of employees covered by the 
scheme in SDSC SHAR as the sanctioned strength of the drivers (around 
160) is less than 15% of the members under the scheme, as a dis tinct 
category considering the Group of employees (A,B,C & D) respectively. 
31. The Latin maxim ‘noscitur a socilis’ states this cont extual 
principle, whereby a word or phrase is not to be construed as if it stood 
alone but in the light of its surroundings – Bennion on Statutory 
Interpretation, Fifth Edition A-G Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover 
[1957] AC 436, Viscount Simonds has opined that “a word or phrase in 
an enactment must always be construed in the light of the surrounding 
text.  “…words and particular general words, cannot be read in isolation, 
their colour and their content are derived from their context.” 
32. Adverting to the facts of the instant case, the scheme of Rules 
1993 clearly manifests that the primary object of the scheme is to promote 
the common service interest of its members and servic e association 
which intends to accord recognition must represent minimum 35% of 
the total category of employees with a rider that where there is only one 
association which commands more than 35% membership and another 
association with second highest membership must be recognized  if it 
commands at least 15% membership. The intention appears to b e to 
avoid plurality of associations which indeed may not be in the overa ll 
interest of the Government servants in forming service ass ociation on 
their job description.  In this context, the expression ‘distinct category of 
government servants’ referred under Rule 5 (c) with its due emphasis in 
furtherance of the clarification which has been made by the rule making 
authority is, in fact, supplementing the scheme of rules for its effective 
and proper implementation which is permissible under the law unless 
held to the contrary and that was never the case of the resp ondent at 
any stage in grouping the classification of posts in group  ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ 
and ‘D’ as a ‘distinct category’, is in contravention to Rule 5 (c ) of 
Rules 1993 and any further sub-classification of posts base d on job 
description is not permissible under the recruitment and conduct rules if 
permitted under the guise of expression ‘distinct category’ to form service 
association, it would defeat the purpose and object with which the scheme 
of Rules 1993 have been framed according recognition to ser vice 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA & ORS. v. ISRO DRIVERS 
ASSOCIATION [AJAY RASTOGI, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
958 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 7 S.C.R. 
association which has been primarily formed with an object of promoting 
the common service interests of its members at large and the literal 
interpretation in isolation of the term ‘distinct category’  made by the 
Division Bench of the High Court in the impugned judgment grantin g 
permission to each group of employees based on job description/trade to 
claim recognition and form their service association would not only defeat 
the primary object of the scheme of Rules 1993 but the purpose as well 
with which the Joint Consultative Machinery has been formed to watch 
albeit the common service interest of its members/Government servants. 
33. On the overall analysis, the appeal deserves to succeed. The 
impugned judgment passed by the Division Bench of the High Court
dated 22 nd  September, 2008 is unsustainable and accordingly set aside. 
34. The appeal is allowed. No costs. 
35. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. 
Kalpana K. Tripathy Appeal allowed.