CRL.M.C. 537/2026                                            Page 1 of 4 pages  
$~58 
* IN  THE  HIGH  COURT  OF  DELHI  AT  NEW  DELHI 
%                         Date of Decision: 21.01.2026  
+  CRL.M.C. 537/2026, CRL.M.A. 2162/2026 & CRL.M.A. 
2161/2026  
 
 RAM SWAROOP GUPTA & ORS.      .....Petitioners 
Through: Mr. Ajatshatru Singh Rawat and Ms. 
Naimishi Verma, Advocates 
    versus 
 
 STATE NCT OF DELHI & ANR.      .....Respondents 
Through: Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, APP for the 
State  
 
 
 CORAM:          JUSTICE GIRISH KATHPALIA 
     
J U D G M E N T    (ORAL) 
 
1. Petitioners/accused seek setting aside of order dated 28.08.2024 of 
learned trial court, whereby their application under Section 311 CrPC for 
recall of PW-1 Jagmohan Gupta for further cross-examination was 
dismissed.  
2. Learned APP for State accepts notice. Mr. Jagmohan Gupta also has 
been impleaded in the present petition as respondent no. 2 but learned 
counsel for petitioners/accused submits that same was done only out of 
abundant precaution and otherwise, he is not a necessary party, it being a

CRL.M.C. 537/2026                                            Page 2 of 4 pages  
State case. As requested, respondent no. 2 is deleted from the array of 
parties.  
3. Learned APP for State in all fairness does not oppose this petition on 
account of following discussion.  
4. Ordinarily, dismissal of an application under Section 348 of BNSS 
(earlier Section 311 CrPC ) being an interlocutory order, the revision 
petition would be barred by Section 438(2) of BNSS [ earlier Section 
397(2)CrPC] and what is explicitly barred, cannot be granted backdoor 
entry by invoking inherent powers. But this bar on the inherent powers is 
subject to a rider, whereby the High Court must examine if any gross 
injustice has been done. If the High Court arrives at a conclusion that the 
interlocutory order caused gross injustice, it would not only be justified for 
the High Court, but also it would be a duty of the High Court to invoke 
inherent powers and prevent injustice. The inherent powers wherever exist, 
are accompanied with an attendant duty to invoke the same to meet ends of 
justice. 
5. In the present case, the gross injustice which appears to have been 
caused to the petitioners/accused is that on 02.09.2023 when PW-1 Mr. 
Jagmohan Gupta appeared for the first time for his cross-examination, the 
present petitioners/accused persons were not accompanied with their 
counsel. Even any proxy counsel was not accompanying them and they were 
called upon to cross-examine PW-1. As expected, the petitioners/accused 
persons being lay persons were unable to cross-examine PW-1, so the

CRL.M.C. 537/2026                                            Page 3 of 4 pages  
learned trial court closed the testimony of PW-1 recording ‘Nil. Opportunity 
given’.  
6. Thereafter, the petitioners/accused filed an application under Section 
311 CrPC, explaining the reason for inability of the defence counsel to 
appear on 02.09.2023. It is also trite that power under Section 311 CrPC can 
be invoked by the trial court on its own as well without waiting for an 
application from either side. In the present case, even the application was 
filed. Although, learned trial court was not convinced with the reasons 
advanced to explain failure of defence counsel to appear, but even after that, 
the learned trial court could have invoked the power on its own to ensure no 
injustice was caused.  
7. In the trial proceedings where the accused in the absence of defence 
counsel, is called upon to cross-examine a witness, it is not just the accused 
who suffers injustice. It is the entire trial which gets vitiated. Presence of 
legal assistance for the accused facing a trial is the core element of fair trial. 
8. In a case where the trial court is convinced that the accused is 
somehow protracting the proceedings in order to frustrate the prosecution 
witnesses, the trial court instead of calling upon the accused in the absence 
of legal assistance to cross-examine the witness, should either appoint an 
amicus curiae  or should direct the local legal services authority to send 
some legal aid counsel. The purpose is that the fairness and purity of trial 
must be kept. In addition, nothing prevents even the trial court to put any 
questions to the prosecution witness because purpose of such trial is to

CRL.M.C. 537/2026                                            Page 4 of 4 pages  
arrive at the truth. In the name of expeditious trial, fairness of the trial 
cannot be allowed to become a casualty.    
9. Therefore, the impugned order is set aside and trial court is directed to 
grant another opportunity to the petitioners/accused through their counsel to 
cross-examine PW-1 Mr. Jagmohan Gupta. The next date before the learned 
trial court is informed to be 07.02.2026. On the next date, the learned trial 
court shall fix fresh date for further cross-examination of PW-1 Mr. 
Jagmohan Gupta, according to the calendar of the learned trial court. 
Accordingly, the petition and the accompanying applications stand allowed.  
10. Copy of this order be sent to all Principal District & Sessions Judges  
in Delhi with the request to circulate the same amongst all Courts dealing 
with criminal trials so that such situation does not arise again.  
 
 
 
GIRISH KATHPALIA 
(JUDGE) 
JANUARY 21, 2026 
‘rs’