2026 INSC 831
 
Page 1 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
Reportable 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Civil Appeal No.                  of 2026 
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025) 
 
 
Basudev & Ors.           
 ...Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
 
Sanjay Kumar & Ors.      
  ...Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
K.Vinod Chandran, J. 
 
     Leave granted. 
2. The question to be answered in this appeal is as to  
whether there should be two appeals filed from the two decrees 
drawn up when a suit with a counterclaim is disposed of by a 
single judgment. The ancillary question would also be whether 
in every such situation two decrees should be drawn up.  
3.  In the present case, a suit was filed and a counterclaim 
was raised. The Trial Court allowed the suit  claim and 
dismissed the counterclaim. A single appeal was filed by the 
defendants; in which the suit was dismissed and the 
counterclaim was allowed. The High Court in second appeal

Page 2 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
found that the single appeal was incompetent and relied on the 
decision of a Division Bench in Ramesh Chand v. Om Raj and 
Others1. It was held that in the nature of the disposal, decreeing 
the suit and rejecting the counter claim,  there ought to be two 
separate appeals filed. In the teeth of the principle of waiver 
and estoppel the single appeal will have to be rejected was the 
finding. We are not concerned with  the merits of the  claims; 
suffice it to notice that when the plaintiffs claimed half share and 
sought for an injunction against interference, the defendants 
raised a counterclaim of ownership over the entire property. 
4. Sri Jayant Bhus han, learned Senior Counsel for the 
appellants, would first point out th at there is only one decree 
drawn up which is produced at Annexure P-13. When the Court 
itself had drawn up only one decree , the defendant’s appeal 
filed, could not have been rejected  is the argument. Reliance 
was also placed on Narhari v. Shanker 2 and Charan Singh v. 
Ram Saroop3. 
5. Sri Sanjay R. Hegde, learned Senior Counsel for the 
respondents, relied upon Ramesh Chand1, as relied on in the 
 
1 2022 (2) SLC 1145 
2 1950 SCC 668 
3 C.A. No.1585-1586 of 2025 dated 03.02.2025

Page 3 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
impugned judgment and specifically referred to Premier Tyres 
Ltd. v. Kerala State Road Transport Corporation 4. The 
defendant does not dispute the position that there will be only 
one decree, but there has to be two appeals filed, is the 
contention.  
6. We would first look at the decisions on this point, urged 
by both the learned Senior Counsel ; in the arguments 
addressed and the written submissions. 
7. Narhari2 dealt with a suit filed  to establish 2/3 rd rights 
over a property against eight defendants , wherein t wo sets of 
defendants, set up separate claims of 1/3rd rights each over the 
suit property. The Trial Court decreed the suit and the  two 
separate appeals filed were allowed , dismissing the suit and 
allowing the counterclaims. The plaintiff preferred two second 
appeals, one, within time and the other, delayed. The delayed 
appeal was dismissed on the ground of limitation and as a 
consequence, the other appeal also stood dismissed, finding it 
to be hit  by res-judicata. This Court found the ground of res- 
judicata to be specious, when there is only one suit, the decrees 
founded on the same judgment, deciding the entire suit. It was 
 
4 1993 Supp. (2) SCC 146

Page 4 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
found that the two decrees, in substance are one and besides , 
the High Court had failed to give the benefit of Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act, especially when there were conflicting 
decisions on this question. 
8. In Charan Singh3 the Trial Court dismissed the suit and 
allowed the counterclaim  against which only one appeal was 
preferred, which was dimissed as not maintainable. This Court 
found the requirement in law, to file two appeals, but went on to 
permit the appellant to file a separate memorandum of appeal, 
without a certified copy of the judgment since, Order XLI Rule 
1 of the CPC permitted the Appellate Court to dispense with the 
requirement of filing a copy of the impugned judgment twice 
over even when two  separate appeals  are filed. This was 
observed to be in  furtherance of  ends of justice, so that the 
subject matter is considered on its merits.  
9. In Girija and Ors.  v. Rajan 5 the High Court of Kerala 
considered an identical  substantial question of law  as to 
whether the single appeal filed from the dismissal of a counter 
claim, without an appeal against the decree in the suit , would 
fail on the ground  of res-judicata. Reliance was placed on a 
 
5 2015 (1) KLT 695

Page 5 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
decision of this Court in Premier Tyres Limited4 to extract the 
following: - 
“Where an appeal arising out of connected suit s is 
dismissed on merits the other cannot be heard and has 
to be dismissed . Where no appeal is filed, as in this 
case from the decree in connected suit, it has the same 
effect of non-filing of appeal against the judgment or 
decree. Thus , the finality of finding recorded in the 
connected suit , due to non -filing appeal , precludes 
the court from proceeding with appeal in other suit.” 
 
10. The argument that the power of the Appellate Court under 
Order XLI Rule 33 of the CPC w as all encompassing, being a 
continuation of the original proceeding, empowering it to pass 
any decree or make any order and such further orders or 
decree as the case may require, was negated. It was held that 
the power under Order XLI Rule 33 cannot be invoked against 
specific statutory provisions: namely, Section 11 of the CPC . 
Res-judicata is non -negotiable and indefeasible, creating an 
absolute bar against th e Court from deciding a matter which 
was substantially in issue and decided in a former case. State of 
Punjab v. Bakshish Singh6 was relied on for the principle that 
Order XLI Rule 33 is discretionary and in the garb of exercising 
such power, the scope of appeal cannot be enlarged. Order VIII 
 
6 (1998) 8 SCC 222

Page 6 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
Rule 6A of the CPC clothes a counterclaim with all the 
characteristics of a cross suit, including the vulnerability of 
suffering the bar of res-judicata enshrined in Section 11 of the 
CPC, if not properly appealed, was the finding. The first appeal 
filed in the said case against the decree passed in the suit was 
held to be barred by res-judicata since the dismissal of the 
counterclaim was not challenged. 
11.  Shankar Masu Dokare v. Shobha Subhash Dokare and 
Anr.7 from the High Court of Bombay considered an identical 
issue.  Narhari2 was relied on to hold that,  when there is one  
suit and a counterclaim, there is only; one trial, one finding and 
one decision and hence there need not be two appeals. Order 
XLI Rule 1 of the CPC postulated only filing of one copy of the 
judgment if the suits are tried together, even if two decrees are 
passed. Order XX Rule 19 of the CPC  posits that the decree 
passed in a suit in which a counterclaim is filed, shall be subject 
to the same provisions in respect of an appeal , if there was no 
counter claim. This cannot be extended to contend that there is 
requirement for filing of two appeals. Th us, the prayer in the 
suit and the counterclaim  are so interlinked that the 
 
7 2014 SCC Online Bom 1859

Page 7 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
requirement was only to file one appeal , which is not in 
contravention of any of the provisions of the CPC , was the 
finding. 
12. Abdul Nazer v. Lakshmana Das8 dealt with a defect noted 
by the Registry , that one appeal would not suffice against two 
decrees; one  dismissing the suit and the other allowing the 
counterclaim, based on Girija5.  It was held, Rule 6A of Order 
VIII of the CPC confers on the counter claim the same effect as 
a cross-suit and it is to be treated as a plaint , by a legal fiction 
employed by sub-rules (2) and (4) of Rule 6A CPC. Rule 19(1) 
of Order XX CPC was also referred, to hold that homogeneity is 
evident in the composite decree which has to state what amount 
is due to the plaintiff and the defendant , with the sum for 
recovery specified, which  appears to be due  to either the 
plaintiff or the defendant . Rule 6C of Order VIII providing for 
raising an objection against the counterclaim as being 
independent of the original claim in the suit, clearly indicates 
that it is a unified proceeding as held in T.K.V.S. 
Vidyapoornachary Sons v. M.R. Krishnamahary 9. The 
decision in Girija5 was reversed in Abdul Nazer8 by a Division 
 
8 2016 SCC OnLine Ker 41103 
9 AIR 1983 Mad 291

Page 8 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
Bench and it was held that the single appeal  filed would be 
maintainable against the decree s respectively  passed in  the 
suit and in the counterclaim. 
13. The High Court of Madras in T.K.V.S. Vidyapoornachary 
Sons9 held that though Order VIII Rule 6A speaks of a 
counterclaim as a plaint at one place and a cross -claim at 
another, the operative portion lays down that the court shall 
pronounce a single judgment in the suit, both on the original 
claim and on the counterclaim. Thus, a suit -claim and a 
counterclaim are not distinctly apart and Rule 6C by implication 
emphasizes that a suit -claim and a counterclaim constitute a 
unified proceeding.  
14.  Ghanshyam Singh v. Narendra Singh 10 from the High 
Court of Uttarakhand relied on Rajni Rani & Another v. Khairati 
Lal11 to hold that one composite appeal against the two 
independent and distinct decrees; in the suit and a 
counterclaim, would not be tenable since they are independent 
proceedings. Immediately, we have to notice that we are 
unable to agree that Rajni Rani 11 propounded such a view. 
Considerable reliance was placed on Rajni Rani 11, in the 
 
10 Second Appeal No.76 of 2022 decided on 22.07.2022 by High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital 
11 (2015) 2 SCC 682

Page 9 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
written submission of the respondents  also, to uphold the 
impugned judgment, despite accepting that there need be only 
a single decree drawn up in the suit and the counter claim.  
15.  In Rajni Rani11 the suit for declaration of ownership  was 
resisted with a counterclaim, by some defendants, claiming to 
be the real owners of the suit scheduled property, based on a 
will. The other defendants sought dismissal of the counterclaim 
on the ground that it was barred by Order II Rule 2 of the CPC; 
since in an earlier suit between the same parties , with respect 
to the very same property , the said claim was not raised. The 
learned Trial Judge dismissed the counterclaim against which a 
revision was filed under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. 
This Court at the very outset made it clear that they would not 
advert to the merits of t he order and were only concerned 
whether a revision petition could have been entertained or 
whether it was obligatory to assail the order by way of an 
appeal. Extracting Rule 6A, 6B and 6D of Order VIII of the CPC, 
it was found that the counterclaim in the suit is in the nature of a 
suit and even if the suit is to be dismissed, the counterclaim 
would remain alive for adjudication. We cannot but observe 
that this was not to declare that the suit could be dismissed at

Page 10 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
the first instance and then the counterclaim was to be 
considered as an independent suit. In fact, the court 
emphasized in Paragraph 9.6 that the very scheme of a 
counterclaim is to avoid multiplicity, and the court is required 
to pronounce a final judgment in the suit, both on the original 
claim and on the counterclaim; the seminal purpose being to 
avoid piecemeal adjudication.   
16. In Gumai Singh v. Baburam12, the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh relied on Rajni Rani 11 to find that a suit and a 
counterclaim when disposed of by a single judgment, there are 
two decrees  drawn up , and both have to be appealed 
separately in two different appeals.  The High Court of Madras 
in K. Kandasamy v. P. Natarajan & Others 13, held otherwise, 
that, a single appeal would be maintainable against a common 
judgment rendered in a suit and a counterclaim, since Order 
VIII Rule 6A of the CPC treats the counterclaim as a cross -suit 
which culminates in a single judgment and a composite decree, 
which does not necessitate multiplicity of appeals.  
17.  Ramesh Chand1, as relied on in the impugned judgment, 
also found that where both the suit and the counterclaim are 
 
12 Second Appeal No.144 of 2012 decided on 28.07.2025 by Madhya Pradesh High Court at Gwalior 
13 2026 SCC OnLine Mad 14

Page 11 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
disposed of  by a common judgment, regardless of whether 
separate decree s have been prepared , there shall be two 
appeals filed (Para 42 (iv)). The appellants argued that that this 
would in fact be contrary to the principle enunciated in the very 
same decision in Para 42 (i) , that when two suits are 
consolidated and tried together, the same can be subjected to 
challenge by way of a single appeal , while, two suits, which 
were not consolidated but are decided by a common judgment, 
require a challenge by way of two appeals (Para 42(iii)). As held 
in Rajni Devi11.  It was found that there could be situations when 
the suit is dismissed ; in default or as withdrawn, then the 
counter claim is continued.  
18.  The aforesai d decisions clearly indicate that there is a 
cleavage of opinion , insofar as whether two appeals are 
required to be filed when there is a suit and a counterclaim, 
both being disposed of by a  common judgment. There also 
seems to be dissimilarity in the procedure adopted in the 
different States, in drawing up  the decree from a single 
judgment, allowing one claim and rejecting the other,  which 
normally gives rise to two decrees. We are in full agreement 
with the interpretation of Rule 6A to 6D of Order VIII of the CPC;

Page 12 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
inserted in 1976 , as declared in Rajni Rani 11. Rule 6A  (1) 
enabled a counterclaim against the claim in the plaint, in 
addition to the right to plead set off.  Sub-rule (2) enables the 
counterclaim to be treated as a cross-suit, facilitating a common 
judgment, both on the suit claim and the counterclaim. The 
plaintiff is provided a right to file a written statement in answer 
to the counterclaim, especially since the counterclaim is 
deemed to be a plaint under sub-rule (4); governed by the rules 
applicable to plaints. The rules relating to written statements 
are also made applicable to the written statement in reply to the 
counterclaim, by virtue of Rule 6G of Order VIII. 
19.   We also agree with the finding that  when Rule 6C  of 
Order VIII excludes a counterclaim, when it is an independent 
cause required to be agitated in an independent suit, it implies 
that a counterclaim should be so interlinked with the suit claim 
to facilitate adjudication of both;  on the evidence led at one  
trial. It is noticing Rule 6D, that , even if the suit is stayed, 
discontinued or dismissed, the counterclaim may nevertheless 
be proceeded with; that Rajni Rani 11 expressed the opinion , 
that a suit even if dismissed the counterclaim survives, which 
was misinterpreted by two High Courts  to find a requirement

Page 13 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
for two appeals from a common judgment adjudicating a suit 
and counter claim.  
20.  We reiterate that in Ranji Rani 11 the question was 
whether the rejection of a counterclaim for reason of it being 
barred by Order II Rule 2, has to be challenged in appeal or 
whether a revision would lie under Article 227 of the 
Constitution of India. The question of two appeals being fil ed 
from a decree in the counterclaim and the suit, did not arise at 
all since in Rajni Rani11 the suit was pending before the Trial 
Court, and the counterclaim alone was rejected under order VII 
Rule 11; which rejection order was amenable only to an appeal. 
But there may arise occasions where there should be two 
decrees drawn up, like in Rajni Rani 11 itself. If the appeal 
against the dismissal of the counter claim, on a decree drawn 
up, is pending without a stay of the suit and eventually the suit 
is either dismissed or allowed, then necessarily there should be 
another decree drawn up, which would als o have to be 
subjected to an appeal. 
21.  In this context, we also notice Order XX Rule19 from 
which sub-rule (1) was noticed in Abdul Nazer8, which applies 
to a suit for recovery of money, when a counterclaim is also with

Page 14 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
respect to the money due. Rule 19(1) may not have application 
in the very many cases we noticed, wherein the subject matter 
of the suit was a claim and counterclaim with respect  to 
ownership and possession  of immovable property . Apposite 
would be sub-rule (2) of Order XX Rule 19, which indicates that 
any decree passed in a suit, in which a set off or counterclaim is 
raised, shall be subject to the same provisions  applicable to a 
suit in which no counterclaim is raised. It only indicates that 
when a counterclaim is raised and decided, the appeal 
provisions with respect to a decree in a suit would squarely 
apply. It does not, according to us, either require that two 
appeals have to be filed or by implication prohibit a single 
appeal. 
22. Here, we  have to notice the judgment of this Court in  
Laxmidas Dayabhai Kabrawala v. Nanabhai Chunilal 
Kabrawala14, rendered in a slightly different context. Therein 
one of the partners, filed a suit for enforcement of an 
agreement, entered into with a deceased partner; resisted by 
the legal representatives of the deceased, with a counterclaim 
of settlement of accounts on dissolution of the firm. The Trial 
 
14 AIR 1964 SC 11

Page 15 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
Court while dismissing the suit held the counterclaim to be not 
permissible under the CPC, but left liberty to bring a separate 
suit for accounts and share of the profits, if so advised.  Even in 
the absence of a provision enabling a counterclaim, it was held 
by a majority that despite the counter claim raised not 
confirming to the requirements of a plaint, as prescribed in the 
CPC, it could as well be treated as a cross suit. It is not proper 
to deny the court the power and jurisdiction to read and 
construe the pleadings in a reasonable manner and consider 
the claim raised, as would have been dealt with, if it was made 
in the form of a plaint. Eventually the matter was restored to the 
Trial Court permitting the defendant to file a fresh written 
statement raising the counter claim satisfying the requirements 
of a plaint, as provided in the CPC and the plaintiff given further 
opportunity to controvert such pleadings by a written 
statement. Laxmidas Dayabhai Kabrawala 14 even in the teeth 
of the unamended CPC, permitting only a cross suit , sans the 
enabling provision to raise a counterclaim, directed the 
counterclaim to be considered as a cross-suit. This very scheme 
has been brought into operation after the amendment of 1976 
in the CPC enabling a counterclaim by the defendant in a suit.

Page 16 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
23.  In this context, we notice the concurring judgment in 
Abdul Nazer 8 noticing Owners and Parties Interest in M.V. 
‘Vali Pero’ v. Fernandeo Lopez and Others 15, as to the rule of 
procedure, extracted herein: - 
“Rules of procedure are not by themselves an end but 
the means to achieve the ends of justice. Rules of 
procedure are tools forged to achieve justice and are not 
hurdles to obstruct the pathway to justice. Construction 
of a rule of procedure which promotes  justice and 
prevents its miscarriage by enabling the court to do 
justice in myriad situations, all of which cannot be 
envisaged, acting within the limits of the permissible 
construction, must be preferred to that which is rigid and 
negatives the cause of justice. The reason is obvious. 
Procedure is meant to subserve and not rule the cause of 
justice. Where the outcome and fairness of the 
procedure adopted is not doubted and the essentials of 
the prescribed procedure have been followed, there is 
no reason t o discard the result simply because certain 
details which have not prejudicially affected the result 
have been inadvertently omitted in a particular case. In 
our view, this appears to be the pragmatic approach 
which needs to be adopted while construing a p urely 
procedural provision. Otherwise, rules of procedure will 
become the mistress instead of remaining the handmaid 
of justice, contrary to the role attributed to it in our legal 
system.” 
          
24. Section 96 of the CPC prov ides an appeal from every 
decree leading to the unequivocal declaration of law by the 
 
15 (1989) 4 SCC 671

Page 17 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
High Courts and this Court, that an appeal is from a decree and 
not from a judgment. Order XLI Rule 1 as it was before the 
amendment in 01.07.2002  also required the Memorandum of 
Appeal to be accompanied by a copy of the decree. As of now, 
the word ‘decree appealed from and (unless the Appellate court 
dispenses therewith) of the judgment on which it is founded ’ has 
been substituted with the word ‘judgment’ in Order XLI Rule 1 
with effect from 01.07.2002. The intention of the legislature is 
very clear that the delay in drawing up decrees shall not 
frustrate the appellate remedy and there should be an end to 
multiplicity of proceedings.  
25. Immediately, we have to notice Rule 6A of Order XX, CPC 
having the nominal heading of ‘Preparation of decree’. Sub-rule 
(1) speaks of expeditious drawing up of a decree, at any rate, 
within fifteen days from the date of pronouncement of 
judgment. Sub-rule (2) permits an appeal to be preferred, with 
a judgment, if a decree has not been drawn up , which shall for 
the purposes of Rule 1 of Order XLI be treated as a decree. It is 
also provided that as soon as a decree is drawn up, the 
judgment shall cease to have the effect of a decree for the 
purpose of execution or for any other purpose s. The provision

Page 18 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
insofar as an appeal is concerned is redundant since Rule 1 of 
Order XLI permits an appeal to be filed accompanied by  a 
judgment. Hence, sub-rule (2) of Order XX Rule 6A  only applies 
insofar as execution, as of now.  
26. In this context, we have to notice that before the 
amendment brought to Rule 6A of Order XX by Act 46 of 1999, 
it provided that “the last paragraph of the judgment shall state in 
precise terms the relief which has been granted by such 
judgment’(sic). This stood omitted by Act 46 of 1999, the 
consequence of which came up for consideration before the 
Andhra Pradesh High Court in Faqruddin v. Didde 
Mahadevappa and Others 16.  Therein the suit was filed for 
declaration of title, recovery of possession and consequential 
injunction. The suit was fully decreed but however in the 
operative portion of the judgment, recovery of possession was 
omitted, which hence did not figure in the decree also. On 
execution being filed, recovery was objected to , on the trite 
principle that the Execution Court cannot go beyond a decree.  
A learned Single Judge of the High Court agreed with the 
objection, but gave liberty to the plaintiff to approach the Trial 
 
16 2004 (5) ALT 469

Page 19 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
Court under Section 152 of the CPC for correction of the decree. 
The learned Single Judge noticed that the omission of that 
portion in Rule 6A created more problems than it resolved. It 
was also noticed that simultaneous to the said omission Order 
XLI Rule 1 was also amended, facilitating an appeal to be filed 
accompanied by a copy of the judgment and not the decree.  
Thus, confining the application of a decree to the execution 
proceedings.   
27. Lakshmi Ram Bhuyan v. Hari Prasad Bhuyan 17  though 
rendered after the amendment , did not notice the omission 
made in Rule 6A. Therein, the High Court had in Second Appeal 
overturned a concurrent decision of the Trial Court and the 
Appellate Court but allowed the appeal with costs and a 
direction to the Trial Court, to draw up a decree. Since the relief 
was not specified , t he Trial Court drew up a decree, with 
provision for cost alone which was challenged before this 
Court. It was held  that the obligation cast by Order XX of the 
Code that the decree sh ould agree with the judgment, spells 
out an obligation on the part of the author of the judgment to 
clearly indicate the relief or reliefs to which a party, in his 
 
17 (2003) 1 SCC 197

Page 20 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
opinion, has been found entitled , to enable decree being 
framed in such a manner that it agrees with the judgment and 
specifies clearly the relief granted or other determination of the 
suit. The operative part of the judgment should be so clear and 
precise that in the event of an objection being laid, it should not 
be difficult to find out by a bare reading of the judgment and 
decree whether the latter agrees with the former and is in 
conformity therewith. ‘A self -contained decree drawn up in 
conformity with the judgment would exclude objections and 
complexities arising at the stage of execution ’ (sic). The Andhra 
Pradesh High Court held that though Rule 6A was amended with 
the aforesaid omission, the judgment of this Court having been 
pronounced after such amendment, it takes care of the vacuum 
created by the omission, being the law of the land under Article 
141 of the Constitution of India. For completeness, we have to 
notice that even this Court in Lakshmi Ram Bhuyan 17 left it to 
the decree holder to approach the High Court to get modif ied 
the decree.  
28. We have been informed that in certain States, two decrees 
are drawn up from a  common judgment  in a suit and a 
counterclaim, but in others there is only one decree drawn up,

Page 21 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
as in this case. The necessity of two decrees or one single 
decree, pales into insignificance, especially when the provision 
for appeal requires only a judgment to accompany the 
Memorandum of Appeal . The proviso to Order XLI Rule 1 
enables the certified copy of the judgment to be dispensed 
with, when two appeals from a common judgment in two suits 
tried together, are preferred, whether or not the appeals are 
filed by the same person or not. However, the fact remains that 
the claim in the suit and the counterclaim, when treated as 
cross-suits, court fees are to be paid for the claim raised in the 
suit and also counterclaim raised in the written statement. 
Hence, whether it be a single decree or two, when a composite 
appeal is filed from a  common judgment  in the suit and the 
counterclaim, necessarily court fees have to be paid on the 
valuation in the suit and the counterclaim as applicable to 
appeals.  
29.  Finding no contrary or restrictive provisions in the CPC, 
we hold and declare that a suit and a counterclaim , if  
adjudicated by a single common judgment; both on the original 
claim and on the counterclaim, it can be challenged in a 
composite appeal. The composite appeal, however, should

Page 22 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
show the grounds raised against the decree in the suit and the 
decree in the counterclaim separately ; whether there are two 
decrees or one drawn up. The composite appeal should also be 
valued as two separate appeals and the court fees paid 
accordingly. This would enable the appeal to be considered on 
merits, without the grounds of estoppel and res judicata raised 
only for reason of two appeals not being filed . Though an 
implied mandate could be drawn from the various provisions , 
we are of the opinion that this would ensure avoidance of  
procedural rigmarole as also multiplicity of litigations. 
30. On the above reasoning and also finding that there was 
considerable flux insofar as whether there should be two 
appeals or a composite appeal , in disposal of this appeal, it  
would suffice, if we direct the first appeal to be restored, which 
we do, and to facilitate that , the impugned orders of the High 
Court and the First Appellate Court are set aside. The appellant 
herein would be entitled to file a fresh memorandum with 
separate grounds taken and pa y court fees  for the one 
additional appeal. The appeal so filed shall be considered by 
the First Appellate Court along with the other appeal, on merits 
as expeditiously as possible considering the delay that has now

Page 23 of 23 
CA @ SLP (C) No.4338 of 2025 
 
 
been occasioned. We make it clear that we direct another 
appeal to be filed in this case since there is already one appeal 
filed, but henceforth a challenge against a common judgment 
in a suit and counterclaim, can be by  way of  a composite 
appeal, as directed herein above. 
31. The appeal is allowed with the above directions. 
32. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
33. The Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment 
to all the High Courts.  
 
.......…….……………………. J. 
                    (J. B. PARDIWALA) 
   
 
....……….……………………. J. 
                                   (K. VINOD CHANDRAN) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
AUGUST 11, 2026.