NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION
NEW DELHI
 
CONSUMER CASE NO. 1454 OF 2016
 
1. KRISHAN KUMJAR DWIVEDI
HOUSE NO-59, SEC-31, GURGAON, HARYANA ...........Complainant(s)
Versus  
1. M/S. VCORP DEVELOPERS. PVT. LTD.
ORCHID CENTER GROUND FLOOR, GOLF COURSE 
ROAD, SEC-53, GURGAON-122002 ...........Opp.Party(s)
 
BEFORE: 
  HON'BLE MR. PREM NARAIN,PRESIDING MEMBER
 
For the Complainant : Mr.Mukesh Sharma, Advocate
For the Opp.Party :
 
Dated : 16 May 2017
ORDER
1.      This complaint has been filed by Krishan Kumar Dwivedi complainant, against the 
opposite party.
2.      The case of the complainant is that the opposite party issued advertisement for an 
IT/cyber park in the name of Aquarious Cyber Park, Sector 74, Gurgaon, Haryana (hereinafter 
referred as ‘said project’).  The complainant paid in advance for the office space in the said 
commercial building.  On 22.03.2013, further in order to prove its bonafide and lure the 
complainant, the opposite party company further entered into Developer- Anchor Option 
Agreement-Assured Return Plans qua the aforesaid units/office spaces along with addendum 
dated 22.03.2013 (hereinafter referred to as “the Assured Return Agreement”).  The 
complainant put in respective amounts in the said project and booked three Anchor Unit/Office 
Spaces in the said project. Further, vide the said Assured Return Agreement, the opposite party 
also assured a fixed return amount to the complainant till the time the possession is not granted 
to him.  Pertinently, the opposite party company vide the said space Agreement assured the 
complainant to handover the possession of the said unit/spaces booked in the project within 5 
years from the date of the signing of the said Space Agreement and also assured that the 
opposite party company shall pay the assured return amount as stated in the respective Assured 
Return Agreement for the period of sixty months from the date of the signing of the Assured 
Return or till the date of possession., The complainant sent various reminders to the opposite 
party for informing exact status of the project, however, no reply was given by the opposite 
party.
3.      Hence the complaint.
4.      Heard the learned counsel for the complainant at the admission stage.
5.      Learned counsel for the complainant stated that three units/spaces were booked and total 
consideration of Rs.61,25,000/- was paid as per the following details:-
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

S. No. Unit/Space No. And 
Type of Unit Area (sq. ft.) Price per sq. 
ft.
Total Amount 
Paid (Rs)
1.
IV3/1045-T/ST 
Flat/Office Space 
(Technology Unit)
1500 2750 41,25,000/-
2.
IV3/1046-R/ST 
Flat/Office Space 
(Commercial Retail)
250 4000 10,00,000/-
3
IV3/1047-R/ST 
Flat/Office Space 
(Commercial Retail)
250 4000 10,00,000/-
  Total Consideration 
Paid     61,25,000/-
 
6.      Learned counsel argued that neither the possession was given nor the assured return has 
been paid as promised under the “the Assured Return Agreement”.  It was further argued that 
the complainant purchased the aforementioned commercial properties for expanding his 
activities for earning his livelihood by means of self-employment. It was stated that the 
complainant was and still is earning his livelihood through his sole proprietorship concern. 
With an intention to expand his business and earn his livelihood the complainant registered a 
company in the name of SK Info Developer Pvt. Ltd., whose registered office and the 
corporate office both were located at the same place, hence, with intent to separate these 
offices, these spaces/units were purchased.  Learned counsel pointed out that though these 
spaces are commercial properties, they have been purchased for livelihood of the complainant 
and hence complainant is a consumer under the explanation clause attached to Section 2(1)(d) 
of the Consumer Protection Act 1986.  Coming to the pecuniary jurisdiction aspect of his 
complaint, learned counsel mentioned that Rs.61,25,000/- is the payment that was made to the 
OP and  Rs.39,47,500/- is the due amount of assured return that the complainant is entitled to 
receive from the OP..  Thus the total amount exceeds rupees one crore.  Hence, the National 
Commission will have the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon this complaint.
7.     I have carefully gone through the record and have given thoughtful consideration to the 
arguments advanced by learned counsel for the complainant.  The complainant has made the 
following averments in the complaint:-
“5.   That imperatively, at the time the Complainant purchased the aforementioned 
commercial properties, the Complainant was and still is earning his livelihood through 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

his sole proprietorship.  That, pertinently with an intention to expand his business and 
earn his livelihood the complainant registered a company in the name of SK Info 
Developer Pvt. Ltd.”
8.      The complainant has booked three spaces.  Had it been a case of earning livelihood, He 
would have opted for only one space because he could have worked personally only at one 
space.  Obviously, the complainant cannot work at 3 spaces simultaneously.  Moreover, from 
the averments made in the complaint as mentioned above, it is clear that the complainant is 
already running a company by the name of SK Info Developer Pvt. Ltd.    
9.      As the complainant had also entered into “assured return agreement” with opposite party 
and he got assured income for a few months which was stopped by the opposite party later on. 
it only reveals that these properties were being purchased as an investment. Buying properties 
as investment cannot be treated as buying for livelihood by means of self-employment.  Even, 
though the complainant has stated in the complaint that he has purchased the spaces for 
livelihood, but he has not mentioned whether he was earning the livelihood through self-
employment or otherwise. Clearly complainant is running the company and these spaces were 
bought for expansion of the business activities of the company. Clearly this is not covered 
under self-employment.
10.     Learned counsel for the complainant cited the judgment in Richa and Co. Vs. DLF 
Universal Ltd. &Ors. CO No.236 of 2012, decided on 01.10.2012 (NC) and pointed out 
towards para 17 of this judgment wherein, this Commission has quoted the judgment of Laxmi 
Engineering Works Vs. P.S.G. Industrial Institute, II (1995) CPJ 1 (SC).  In the case cited 
by learned counsel for the complainant, this Commission has only mentioned the principles 
laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the matter of Laxmi Engineering Works (supra) 
wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court has clearly observed that the commercial purpose is to be 
decided from the facts in each case.  As examined above, the complainant had definitely 
purchased three units/spaces for investment and definitely not for earning livelihood by means 
of self-employment.
11.    Based on the above discussion, I find that the complainant’s case is not covered under the 
explanation under Section 2(1)(d) of the Consumer Protection Act 1986, and hence the 
complainant herein is not a consumer.  Accordingly, the complaint is dismissed in limine being 
not maintainable under the Consumer Protection Act 1986.  However, the complainant may 
seek appropriate remedy in the Civil Court for which liberty is granted.. 
 
 
......................
PREM NARAIN
PRESIDING MEMBER
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu