2025:JHHC:35111 
 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JHARKHAND AT RANCHI 
 
S.A.  No. 402 of 2016 
 
1. Deo Nandan Gope    
2. Umesh Gope  
Both S/o Goberdhan Gope, R/o Village - Bujurgai- Zamira, P.S. & 
P.O. Patratu, District- Ramgarh  
  … … Defendants/Respondents/Appellants 
    Versus 
1. Suraj Narayan Gope (dead and substituted v ide order dated  
11/07/24)  
1(a) Sakuntala Devi W/o Late Suraj Narayan Gope    
1(b) Rinku Yadav, Son of Late Suraj Narayan Gope, 
1(c) Mithun Yadav, Son of Late Suraj Narayan Gope, 
All are residents of Bujurga, P.O. & P.S. Patratu, District - 
Ranchi 
2. Santosh Gope, S/o Late Rama Gope @ Rima Gope, Resident of 
Village- Bujurga Zamira, P.O. & P.S. – Patratu, District – 
Ramgarh. 
3. Smt. Sankari Devi, W/o Prabhu Gope 
4. Smt. Hiran Devi, W/o Kunwar Gope,  
Both D/o Late Rama Gope @ Rima Gope,  
Resident of Village Hesalong, P.O. & P.S. – Giddi, District – 
Hazaribagh. 
5. Smt. Peyaso Devi, W/o Mahadeo Gope, D/o Late Rama Gope 
@ Rima Gope, Resident of Village – Bujurga Zamira, P.O. & 
P.S. – Patratu, District – Ramgarh. 
6. Lato Gope @ Latlaha Gope , S/o Late Bhola Gope, Resident of 
Village- Bujurg Zamira, P.O. & P.S. - Patratu, District –
Ramgarh. 
7. Binu Gope @ Bindeshwari Gope, S/o Late Bhola Gope (dead 
and substituted vide order dated 23/09/24) 
7 (a) Antri Devi, W/o Late Binu Gope  
7 (b) Prem Gope, S/o Late Binu Gope  
7 (c ) Sarita Devi, W/o Uday Gope, D/o Late Binu Gope alias   
Bindeshwari Gope  Resident of village Bailgadda, P.O. 
Dunduwa,  P.S. Simariya, Dist. Chatra  
7 (d) Chhotelal Gope, Son of Binu Gope @ Bindeshwari Gope 
7 (e) Vikash Gope, Son of Late Binu Gope @ Bindeshwari Gope 
7 (f) Sunita Kumari , Daughter of Late Binu Gope @ Bindeshwari 
Gope 
 All are residents of Bujurg Jamira, P.O. Barkakana, P.S. – 
Patratu, District Ramgarh.  
  … Plaintiffs/Cross Objectors/Respondents 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
2 
 
8. Most. Parul, W/o Late Dimar Gope, Resident of Village 
Bujurga – Zamira, P.O. & P.S. Patratu, District – Ramgarh. 
9. Smt. Khema Devi, W/o Mahabir Gope, Resident of Village – 
Kanjagi, P.O. & P.S. Mandu, District – Ramgarh. 
10.  Damodar Ohdar 
11.  Janardan Ohdar 
Both S/o Late Kalindar Yadav, Resident of Village – Pusho, 
P.O. & P.S. Sisai, District- Gumla. 
12.  Ram Sahay Gope 
13.  Mukul Gope 
Both S/o Late Ledo Gope, Resident of Village- Telyatu, P.O. & 
P.S. – Patratu, District – Ramgarh. 
 …….. Defendants/Appellants/Proforma Respondents 
                             
    With 
S.A.  No. 393 of 2016 
1. Deo Nandan Gope    
2. Umesh Gope  
Both S/o Goberdhan Gope, R/o Village - Bujurgaj- Zamira, P.S. & 
P.O. Patratu, District – Hazaribagh, at present – Ramgarh.  
  … … Defendants/Appellants/Appellants 
    Versus 
1. Suraj Narayan Gope (dead and substituted vide order dated  
11.07.2024)  
1(a) Sakuntala Devi W/o Late Suraj Narayan Gope    
1(b) Rinku Yadav, Son of Late Suraj Narayan Gope, 
1(c) Mithun Yadav, Son of Late Suraj Narayan Gope, 
All are residents of Bujurga, P.O. & P.S. Patratu, District - 
Ranchi 
2. Santosh Gope, S/o Late Rama Gope @ Rima Gope, Resident of 
Village- Bujurga Zamira, P.O. & P.S. – Patratu, District – 
Ramgarh. 
3. Smt. Sankari Devi, W/o Prabhu Gope 
4. Smt. Hiran Devi, W/o Kunwar Gope,  
Both D/o Late Rama Gope @ Rima Gope,  
Respondent no.3 Resident of Village Hesalong, P.O. & P.S. – 
Giddi, District – Hazaribagh. 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
3 
 
Resident No.4 R/o -Bujurg Zamira, P.S. – Patratu, District – 
Hazaribagh at present – Ramgarh. 
5. Smt. Peyaso Devi, W/o Mahadeo Gope, D/o Late Rama Gope 
@ Rima Gope, Resident of Village – Bujurga Zamira, P.O. & 
P.S. – Patratu, District – Ramgarh. 
6. Lato Gope @ Latlaha Gope , S/o Late Bhola Gope, Resident of 
Village- Bujurg Zamira, P.O. & P.S. - Patratu, District – 
Hazaribagh at present – Ramgarh. 
7. Binu Gope @ Bindeshwari Gope (dead and substituted vide 
order dated 23/09/24) 
7 (a) Antri Devi, W/o Late Binu Gope alias Bindeshwari Gope 
7 (b) Prem Gope, S/o Late Binu Gope alias Bindeshwari Gope 
7 (c) Sarita Devi, W/o Uday Gope, D/o Late Binu Gope alias 
        Bindeshwari Gope 
7 (d) Chhotelal Gope, S/o Late Binu Gope @ Bindeshwari Gope 
7 (e) Vikash Gope, S/o Late Binu Gope @ Bindeshwari Gope 
7 (f) Sunita Kumari, Daughter of Late Binu Gope @ Bindeshwar i    
Gope 
Respondent Nos. 7 (a), (b), (d), (e) & (f) are residents of Bujurg 
Jamira, P.O. Barkakana, P.S. – Patratu, District Ramgarh, 
Jharkhand, Pin 829102 and  
Respondent no. 7(c) is resident of village – Bailgadda, P.O. 
Dunduwa, P.S. Simariya, District Chatra, Jharkhand, Pin 
825103. 
  … Plaintiffs/Respondents/Respondents 
8. Most. Parul, W/o Late Dimar Gope, Resident of Village 
Bujurga – Zamira, P.O. & P.S. Patratu, District – Ramgarh. 
9. Smt. Khema, W/o Mahabir Gope, Resident of Village – 
Kanjagi, P.O. & P.S. Mandu, District – Ramgarh. 
10.  Damodar Ohdar 
11.  Janardan Ohdar 
Both S/o Late Kalindar Yadav, Resident of Village – Pusho, 
P.O. & P.S. Sisai, District- Gumla. 
12.  Ram Sahay Gope 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
4 
 
13.  Mukul Gope 
Both S/o Late Ledo Gope, Resident of Village- Telyatu, P.O. & 
P.S. – Patratu, District – Ramgarh. 
    …….. Defendants/Appellants/Proforma Respondents 
--- 
  CORAM :HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE ANUBHA RAWAT CHOUDHARY 
---  
  For the Appellants        : Mr. Rahul Kumar Gupta, Advocate 
          : Mr. Rakesh Kumar Singh, Advocate  
          : Ms. Swati Singh, Advocate  
          : Mr. Surya Prakash, Advocate   
  For contesting Respondents : Mr. S.K. Sharma, Advocate 
          : Mr. Sumit Kumar, Advocate  
 
      --- 
Reserved on 20.06.2025          Pronounced on  25.11.2025  
 
1. S.A. No. 393 of 2016 is relating to schedule B property of the 
plaint and S.A. No. 402 of 2016 is relating to schedule C property of 
the plaint. These appeals arise from the judgment dated 07.08.2014 
(decree signed on 20.08.2014) passed by learned Civil Judge, Junior 
Division, (Munsif), Hazaribag in Partition Suit No. 97 of 2005.  
2. S.A. No. 393 of 2016 has been filed against the judgment dated 
06.06.2016 (decree signed on 18.06.2016) passed in Title Appeal No. 
45 of 2014 by the Court of learned District Judge-I, Ramgarh whereby 
the learned 1 st appellate court has dismissed the appeal filed by the 
defendants. The learned trial court had partly decreed the suit for 
partition only with respect to schedule B property and the learned 1 st 
appellate court, upon appeal filed by the defendants with respect to 
Schedule B property, has dismissed the appeal.  
S.A. No. 402 of 2016 has also been filed by the defendants against that 
part of the judgment dated 06.06.2016 in Title Appeal No. 45 of 2014 
whereby the learned 1 st appellate court has been pleased to allow the 
cross-appeal filed by the plaintiffs with respect to Schedule C  
property.  
3. The schedule B property is relating to certain plots in Khata no. 
26 and 28 in village Bujurg Zamira, P.S. Patratu District Hazaribagh 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
5 
 
(now Ramgarh). The schedule C property is in relation with certain 
plots in khata nos. 25, 27, 113 and 114 of the same village. 
 
4. Vide order dated 30.09.2021 passed in both the cases, following 
substantial question of law was framed: -   
(i) Whether the first appellate court has committed 
illegality in reversing the findings of the trial court 
in respect of issue no. 9 without discussing and 
giving reasons as to why first appellate court is 
reversing the aforesaid finding? 
5. The issue no. IX was relating to schedule C property.  
6. Vide order dated 31.03.2022 passed in S.A No. 393 of 2016 the 
following substantial question of law has been framed: -  
(ii) Whether the courts below have misconstrued 
Section 18 of the Hindu Succession Act while 
dealing with Law of Succession regarding 
inheritance of the property of Gurdu Gope? 
7. The Partition Suit was filed by three plaintiffs, namely, Rama 
Gope @ Rima Gope, Lato Gope @ Latlaha Gope and Binu Gope @ 
Bindeshwar Gope, all sons of Late Bhola Gope for the following 
reliefs: 
(a) That after adjudication, a decree may be passed that the 
lands of schedule ‘C’ of the parties irrespective of Khatian 
entries in the individual names of co-parceners; 
(b) That thereafter, a preliminary decree for the half share 
of the plaintiffs with respect to the lands of the suit khatas 
as detailed in Schedule ‘B’ & ‘C’ below be passed and a 
separate Takhta be carved out with respect to the plaintiffs’ 
half share by appointment of a Pleader Commissioner and 
the plaintiffs are put in khas possession of the same by 
evicting the defendants or any person claiming through 
them through the process of the court; 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
6 
 
(c) That a decree for cost of the suit be passed including 
the pendency of the suit and further till possession of the 
plaintiffs’ Takhta is not delivered; 
(d) That any other relief or reliefs to which the plaintiffs 
will be entitled to claim.  
8. Thus, the relief as prayed for, reveals that the plaintiffs sought a 
declaration that schedule -C property was a coparcenary property. 
They further prayed for a preliminary decree for half share of the 
plaintiffs with respect to schedule -B and C property and also sought 
Khas possession of the same by evicting the defendants or any person 
claiming under the defendants.  
9. Arguments of the appellants (defendants)  as reordered in the 
earlier orders passed by this court are as under: -   
  Second Appeal No. 393 of 2016  
a) With respect to the substantial question of law regarding 
appreciation of provision of Section 18 of the Hindu 
Succession Act,1956 (Hereinafter referred to as the Act of 
1956), the learned counsel for the appellants has submitted 
that it is not in dispute that the property in Schedule -B was 
acquired by Gudru Gope and he had two wives; first wife had 
three children including Girdhari Gope, the remaining two 
died issueless. So far as second wife  is concerned, she had 
only one child namely Bhola Gope.  
b) Bhola Gope, son of second wife, had four sons and one of the 
sons died issueless.  The remaining three children of Bhola 
Gope were the plaintiffs. The legal heirs and successor of 
Girdhari Gope were the defendants. The court has directed 
partition of the suit property in the ratio of ½ and ½ share 
between the two branches, Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope.  
c) The learned counsel has submitted that upon death of Gudru 
Gope, the property devolved equally amongst four sons of 
Gudru Gope and upon death of two full brothers of Girdhari 
Gope, the share of the deceased brothers would devolve upon 
the branch of Girdhari Gope and consequently the property 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
7 
 
ought to have been divided in the ratio of ¾ : ¼ with respect 
to the branch of Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope but the 
learned court has wrongly divided the share ½  and ½  
between two branches.  
d) While referring to Section 18 of the aforesaid Act of 1956, 
the learned counsel has submitted that heirs related to an 
intestate by full blood are to be preferred as compared to the 
heirs related by half blood. The learned counsel has also 
referred to the book Mulla on Hindu Law 21 st Edition at 
page no. 149 to submit that the law that whole blood would 
be preferred to half blood was already in existence prior to 
coming into force of the Act of 1956  and such provision 
under Section 18 is basically codifying the existing law with 
respect to this aspect of the matter and he submits that the 
impugned judgment dividing ½  and ½  share between the 
branch of Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope is not in 
accordance with law. He submits that the division of share 
ought to have been in the ratio of 3/4th and 1/4th.  
e) The learned counsel has also referred to page 133 of the same 
book which deals with propinquity being the governing factor 
under Mitakshara law and he submits that it has been stated 
therein that right to inheritance arises from propinquity that is 
‘proximity of relationship’ . He submits that proximity of 
relationship with respect to full brother would be closer as 
compared to half -blood brother and therefore upon death of 
full brothers their share would have devolved upon full blood 
brother and not upon half-blood brother.   
f) The learned counsel submits that once the unity of title and 
possession was found in connection with Schedule -B 
property, the properties ought to have devolved in accordance 
with the Act of 1956 and while giving the findings the 
learned Trial Court has completely ignored Section 18 of the 
Act of 1956.  
 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
8 
 
g) The learned counsel has referred to the issues framed by the 
learned Trial Court and has submitted that share with respect 
to the schedule -B and Schedule -C property comes under 
issue no. X.  
h) The learned counsel further submitted that it was held that 
there was unity of title and possession with respect to 
schedule-B property. While considering issue no. X,  the 
learned court has recorded that the defendants have claimed 
that they had 2/3 rd share and such claim was on the basis of 
compromise decree but such plea was ultimately rejected and 
by referring to certain pleading in the earlier proceedings 
wherein it was asserted that Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope 
had ½ and ½ share in the land, the share was accepted to be  
½ and ½  . The learned counsel has submitted that on the one 
hand the claim of 2/3rd share of Girdhari Gope and 1/3rd share 
of Bhola Gope on the basis of compromise was rejected and 
on the other hand , the pleadings in the earlier partition suit 
was taken into consideration to give ½ and ½ share.  
i) While referring to the judgment passed by the learned 1 st 
Appellate Court, the learned counsel has referred to 
paragraph 11 which records that the whole argument of both 
the parties hinges upon findings with respect to issue nos. 
VIII, IX and X. He submits that arguments of the defendants 
have been recorded in paragraph 12 of the judgment wherein 
the argument with respect to Section 18 of the Act of 1956  
has been recorded in paragraph 12(4), 12(5) and12(6) which 
are as follows:-  
 “(4) That in the suit for partition, the Court 
shall have to determine the share of parties and 
according to Section 18 of the Hindu Succession 
Act, heirs related to an intestate by full blood shall 
be preferred to heirs related by half blood. 
 (5) That as per Hindu Succession Act and 
Mulla's Hindu Law, two persons are related to 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
9 
 
each other by full blood when they are descendants 
from common ancestor by the same wife and by 
half-blood when they are descendants from 
common ancestor by two different wives. 
 (6) That Girdhari Gope being related by full 
blood succeeded share of Bhodhu Gope and Mithu 
Gope and he became owner of 3/4 th share and 
Bhola Gope became owner of 1/4th share.”   
j) The learned counsel further submitted that argument of the 
plaintiffs has also been recorded in paragraph 13 of the 
appellate court’s judgment but no specific argument with 
regard to Section 18 of the Act of 1956 has been mentioned. 
The learned counsel has further referred to paragraph 22 of 
the 1 st Appellate Court’s judgment by which the learned 1 st 
Appellate Court has mentioned about the claim with regard to 
share of full blood/half -blood but he submits that in the 
findings from paragraph 23 to 28 there is no discussion about 
the applicability of Section 18 of the Act of 1956. Paragraphs 
21 to 24 are quoted as under: -  
“21. From going through the documentary oral 
evidence, I find that there is no proof of any partition 
between the Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope. 
22. Now the question arises whether Girdhari Gope was 
entitled for 3/4 share of the properties left by his father 
as per the doctrine of full blood and half blood, and 
Section 4 of the Hindu Succession Act is overriding 
effect on the Section 84 of the C.N.T Act and the 
Principal of Estoppel or admission as mentioned in 
para-3 of the Ext. 5 is against the provision of statute.  
23. The date, month or year of the death of Gudru Gope, 
Bodhu Gope and Mithu Gope as well as the wives of 
Gudru Gope has not been stated by any witness neither 
any document or substantive oral evidence has been 
brought. I am in agreement with the submission of the 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
10 
 
learned counsel of the respondent that share of a 
coparceners in the co-parcenary properties increases or 
decreases as per the variation in the family members. 
The counsel of appellant -defendant has stated that it is 
mentioned in the pleading as well as in the evidence that 
Gudru Gope in his lifetime divided his property in three 
equal share and one Jethan share was allotted to 
Girdhari Gope and 2/3rd share Girdhari Gope and his 
brothers born from the first wife and 1/3 to Bhola Gope 
24. There is no any documentary and oral evidence to 
prove para -13 of the Written Statement. Although this 
fact has been stated by DW -1 in his affidavit -in-chief. 
DW-4 Mansa Gope is a elderly man of village 
Bujurgjamira and he has stated that only two persons 
were allotted Jethans in his village namely Biglara and 
Namrata. He did not take name of Girdhari Gope and 
the second thing to be considered that if the Gudru 
Gope divided his property in three equal shares and one 
share was given to Girdhari Gope as Jethans and 2/3 of 
Girdhari Gope and his brother and one share to Bhola 
Gope, it is arithmetically wrong If whole property is 
divided into three equal share and one share was given 
to Girdhari Gope as jethans, then only 1/3rd share can 
be given to Girdhari Gope and his brother. Although, 
there is no evidence to prove the same. The defendant -
appellant has relied upon the final Decree of Partition 
Suit No. 25/1938. However, from going through the 
documentary evidence, I find that the Court of Munsif 
has held that the suit was not compromised and not filed 
by Bhola Gope and the prayer for drawing final decree 
with respect to the partition Suit No. 25/1938 has not 
been allowed even by the Hon'ble Court. Hence, the 
Partition Suit No. 25/1938 could not be a basis of 
partition and the share of parties cannot be decided; 
since final decree has not been drawn neither 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
11 
 
'dakhaldahani' has been effected. The learned lawyer of 
the appellant submitted that Ext. E series, the most vital 
documents of previous partition and these documents 
has been overlooked by the lower Court to consider the 
pleading of partition between the parties. I compared 
the lands sold by parties by Ext. E series are in 
consonance of their kabjabari for the Khatiyan vide Ext. 
1 series. I find that the heirs of Girdhari Gope and 
Bhola Gope sold of only those lands pertaining to Khata 
no. 26, 28 and 113 which are mentioned as kabzawari 
against their name in the Khatiyan. The judgment 
reported in 1995 got into JLJR 1192 and vide para 22 
of the judgment the effect of kabjabari(kabjadari) has 
been mentioned. I would like to mention only one line of 
the judgment as far as kabjadari is concerned 
"Kabjadari does not indicate partition through met es 
and bounds" In the case in hand, the partition cannot 
presumed since separate kabjabari has been mentioned 
in the Khatiyan as well as there has been interse 
transaction between the parties about the suit land. The 
learned lawyer of the appellant further raised matter of 
doctrine of merger. The principal of merger does not 
apply in this case since the judgment and order of the 
second appeal has not been brought on the record. 
Further, I find that Title Suit No. 148/1970 has been 
dismissed on merit and there is no any modified or 
reverse judgment of Appellate Court. Therefore, the 
principal of merger is not going to help the appellant 
anymore. 
 Therefore, I find that the lands pertaining to Khata no. 
26 and 28 which are included in Schedule B of the 
plaint has not been partitioned by metes and bounds. 
Therefore, Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope are entitled 
equal half share to the lands of Schedule B' property 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
12 
 
Therefore, the finding of the lower Court as far as 
Schedule 'B' property is concerned stands upheld.”   
k) The learned counsel further submitted that once the 
genealogy is not in dispute the nature of relationship is also 
not in dispute. The date, month or year of death of Gudru 
Gope, Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope as well as wives of 
Gudru Gope has not been brought on record. Upon applying 
Section 18 of the Act of 1956, the property ought to have 
devolved in the ratio of 3/4: 1/4.  
l) The learned counsel has relied upon a full Bench judgment of 
Hon’ble Bombay High Court reported in 1983 SCC Online 
Bombay 304 (Waman Govind Shindore v. Gopal Baburao 
Chakradeo) and has referred to paragraph 13 thereof to 
submit that it has been clearly held that plain reading of 
provision of Section 18 of the Act of 1956 appears to be clear 
that it is nothing but a substantial reproduction of the 
prevalent rule of Hindu Law under which the relations of the 
whole blood were preferred to those of half -blood if their 
degree of relationship to the deceased was the same. The 
learned counsel has submitted that the aforesaid finding of 
Hon’ble Bombay High Court finds support from the aforesaid 
discussions made in Mulla Hindu Law. The learned counsel 
has also referred to the judgment passed by the Hon’ble 
Calcutta High Court reported in 1982 SCC Online Cal 218 
(Ujjal Kumar Singh and others Vs. Lakshman Chandra 
Singh and others).  
m) The learned counsel has submitted that Gudru Gope died 
leaving behind his four sons and upon his death, the property 
equally devolved upon each one of them and upon death of 
two of them who were full brothers of Girdhari Gope, their 
share would have gone to the share of Girdhari Gope and the 
fourth son through the second wife could not claim any 
further property.  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
13 
 
n) The name of common ancestor of the parties was Gudru 
Gope, whose date of death has not been placed on record. He 
had two wives; termed as first wife and second wife. 
However, their date s of death have also not been placed on 
record. There is no finding that the children born out of wife 
termed as second wife were illegitimate children. It is not in 
dispute that two sons of first wife had expired but the dates of 
death of two sons of the first wife are also not available on 
record.  
o) It is not in dispute that the property was acquired by Gudru 
Gope and upon his death, it became ancestral property. The 
story of previous partition has been denied by the learned 
court and such finding has attained finality as no substantial 
question of law has been framed concerning previous 
partition. Though the date of death of aforesaid two sons of 
Gudru Gope has not come on record but it stood admitted 
from the side of the plaintiff s that two sons of Gudru Gope 
expired after the death of Gudru Gope.  
p) The property of Gudru Gope was self-acquired by him. Upon 
his death, it became the ancestral property of all his sons but 
still it did not constitute a coparcenary property as his sons 
did not constitute a coparcenary qua the property. He has 
submitted that the first generation does not form a 
coparcenary. It is the second with third generation which 
would form the coparcenary with respect to the property of 
the first generation inherited by the second generation as 
ancestral property. 
q) The core arguments of the appellant s are that the property 
involved in this case was the self -acquired property of Gudru 
Gope and upon his death, it devolved upon all the four 
brothers but the four brothers got the property as ancestral 
property and not as coparcenary property as the four brothers 
did not constitute a coparcenary qua the self -acquired 
property of Gudru Gope. He has also submitted that had the 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
14 
 
brothers had further children then the portion of the property 
which would devolve upon one or the other brother would 
constitute a coparcenary property with his sons. He has also 
submitted that Hindu coparcenary is narrower than the joint 
Hindu family and ancestral property is just a species of 
coparcenary property. He has referred to Clause 210, 211 and 
212 of Mulla on Hindu Law 21st Edition. 
r) The learned counsel for the appellant s has submitted that 
upon death of Gudru Gope, the four sons did not constitute a 
coparcenary qua the self -acquired property of Gudru Gope, 
although upon his death, the property constituted ancestral 
property; further upon death of two sons, the property would 
not devolve by survivorship  but would devolve upon full 
brother and not half -brother by succession referable to 
Section 18 of the Act of 1956.  
s) The finding of the learned 1st appellate court is that because 
all the four brothers constitute coparcenary therefore the 
property would devolve by survivorship and not by 
succession. He submits that the four brothers did not 
constitute coparcenary qua the self -acquired property of 
Gudru Gope and therefore the property would devolve by 
succession and not by survivorship. 
10. Arguments of the contesting respondents  (plaintiffs) are as 
under: -   
i. The learned counsel for the respondents  submits that the 
perusal of the plaint reveals that the 2nd and 3rd generation of 
Gudru Gope were seeking partition of property which was self -
acquired by Gudru Gope. He submits that even if the arguments 
of the appellant s are accepted then also the property was 
coparcenary property at the hand of 2nd and 3rd generation of 
Gudru Gope. 
ii. The suit seeking partition having been filed by the 3 rd 
generation, the suit property in any way was coparcenary 
property in their hand and therefore the property would have 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
15 
 
devolved through survivorship; since two brothers had expired 
therefore the property devolved half and half between Girdhari 
Gope and Bhola Gope.  
iii. Section 18 of the Act of 1956 has no applicability as all the four 
brothers, who were sons of Gudru Gope, stood on equal footing 
and two of them died issueless. The plaintiffs and defendants do 
not stand in the same category and the level of their generation 
is different. For the applicability of Section 18, the relationship 
should be at the same level which is not applicable in the 
present case. He has relied upon a judgment passed by the 
Hon’ble Patna High Court reported in 2006 AIR Patna 169 
(Ram Singari Devi and Ors. Vs. Govind Thakur and Ors.).  
iv. In order to explain the concept of coparcenary, the learned 
counsel has relied upon the judgment passed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court reported in (2016) 4 SCC 68 (Uttam versus 
Saubhag Singh and Others).  
v. In the absence of date of death of concerned family members, 
the right over the property in the hand of one or the other family 
members of the joint family did not crystalize as a coparcenary 
property.  
vi. The learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that so 
far as Schedule -B property is concerned, it consists of Khata 
No. 26 and 28 and the Khatiyan in Khata No. 26 reveals that it 
was shown in the name of Girdhari Gope on one part and in the 
name of Ram Gope son of Binu Gope and grandson of Bhola 
Gope on 2nd part. However, so far as Khata No. 28 is concerned, 
from the Khatiyan there is no separate bifurcation with respect 
to the shares. The learned counsel submits that the record of 
rights was challenged by the appellants but they did not succeed 
and accordingly the half and half share of Girdhari Gope on one 
hand and branch of Bhola Gope on another has been rightly 
done.  
vii. The learned counsel for the respondents has also referred to 
Exhibit-4 to submit that the Award was also prepared upon 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
16 
 
acquisition of land in case No. 16 of 1987 -88 as back as in the 
year 1989 on the basis of compromise and it was prepared half 
and half. However, upon perusal of the said document he has 
not been able to point out as to which plot number it was 
relating as there is no mention of any Khata number on the 
same. The joint compromise has also not been brought on 
record. The learned counsel has submitted that the dispute in 
connection with compensation is pending before this court as 
per the order passed by the learned 1st Appellate Court.  
viii. The learned counsel for the respondents has referred to Hindu 
Law by Mulla 20 th Edition 1 st Volume page no. 360. The 
learned counsel while referring to the aforesaid page has 
referred to Article 212 dealing with formation of coparcenary 
and has submitted that conception of a joint Hindu Family 
constituting a coparcenary is that of a common male ancestor 
with his lineal descendants in the male line within four degrees 
counting from and inclusive of such ancestor (or three degree 
exclusive of the ancestor). No coparcenary can commence 
without a common male ancestor, though after his death, it may 
consist of collaterals such as brothers, uncles, nephew, cousins 
etc. The learned counsel while referring to this has submitted 
that all the four sons of Gudru Gope, constituted coparcenary. 
He has relied upon a judgment passed by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court reported in (2020) 9 SCC 1 (Vinita Sharma versus 
Rakesh Sharma) and has referred to paragraph no. 66, 69, 73 
and 129 of the said judgment to submit that coparcenary 
continues till there is actual partition. Therefore, the learned 
court has rightly held that property was coparcenary property.  
11. Rejoinder arguments of the appellants. 
The learned counsel for the appellants in response has submitted that 
as per Hindu Law, upon the death of a Hindu, the devolution of the 
property takes place immediately irrespective of actual partition. He 
submits that upon death of Gudru Gope, it devolved equally upon all 
the four sons (three from 1 st wife and one from 2 nd wife) and upon 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
17 
 
death of two full brothers of Girdhari Gope, the two sons of 1 st wife, 
the share of two deceased full brothers would devolve only upon 
Girdhari Gope being related by full blood and accordingly the share of 
Girdhari Gope would be 3/4th.. The remaining 1/4th share will go to the  
only son of 2nd wife , namely, Bhola Gope. The learned counsel for the 
appellants has submitted that the property of Gudru Gope is self -
acquired and his next generation would not constitute coparceners 
amongst themselves. He submits that each of the brothers who were 
sons of Gudru Gope would constitute separate coparcener with respect 
to the property as and when the 3rd generation is born. In order to form 
coparcenary qua the property there has to be a coparcenary and also 
coparcenary property. The learned counsel submits that the 
brothers/sons of Gudru Gope did not acquire the property as 
coparcenary property and therefore each branch of four sons along 
with their descendants formed separate coparcenary with respect to 
coparcenary property acquired by their respective father.  
 Second Appeal No. 402 of 2016  
12. Arguments of the appellants (defendants)  
The learned counsel for the appellants submits that this 2nd appeal 
relates to Schedule -C property. He has referred to issue no. ( IX) 
decided by the learned Trial Court and has submitted that it has been 
held that merely because there was a joint family , that does not mean 
that the property was joint family property.  He has also submitted that 
the property under Khata No. 25 and 27 on the one hand and 113 and 
114 on the other hand were recorded in the name of Girdhari Gope 
and Bhola Gope respectively and such entry in the record of rights 
was never challenged. The entry has attained finality and the 
respondents never challenged the separate entry with respect to the 
concerned properties. The learned counsel has submitted that nucleus 
to acquire the property was never proved and consequently the 
property was rightly held to be the self -acquired property of Girdhari 
Gope and Bhola Gope respectively and was kept out of partition 
holding that there was no unity of title and possession between the 
parties with respect to Schedule-C property in the plaint.  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
18 
 
13. He submits that such finding has been reversed by the learned 
1st Appellate Court in the Cross Appeal and in the 1 st appellate court’s 
judgment there is no finding with respect to the nucleus to acquire the 
property.  
14. The learned counsel has submitted that the case has been 
decided primarily based on pleadings of the respective parties and not 
on the basis of evidences adduced before the court. The learned 
counsel has submitted that in order to claim that the property was joint 
family property, the nucleus was required to be proved by the person 
who claimed that it was a joint family property. Nucleus having not 
been proved and the property duly recorded in the record of rights, the 
property was self -acquired property of the respective parties. He 
submits that the judgment passed by the learned 1 st Appellate Court is 
fit to be set aside. He has relied upon the judgment passed by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court reported in (2003) 10 SCC 310 (D.S. 
Lakshmaiah and another)  paragraph 17 and 18 on the point of 
onus/burden of proof with regard to joint family property.   
15. Arguments of the contesting respondents (plaintiffs) in 
Second Appeal No. 402 of 2016.  
 The learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that illegality 
in the finding recorded by the learned courts by itself is not the 
substantial question of law . O nly in case of perversity, the findings 
can be  a subject matter of substantial question of law.  Both the 
learned courts found that Schedule -B and C property were 
coparcenary property.  
16. The learned counsel for the respondents has referred to the 
judgment passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported in (2003) 10 
SCC 310  (Supra) which has also been relied upon by the learned 
counsel for the appellants and has submitted that though there is no 
presumption that the property is a joint family property merely 
because there is an existence of joint family, but once the nucleus is 
proved from which the joint family property could be acquired, the 
onus shifted upon the appellants to plead and prove  the source of 
income from which they acquired the schedule -C property. The 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
19 
 
learned counsel submits that there is finding of the learned courts that 
there is nucleus in the family. 
17.  The learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the 
learned 1st appellate Court has considered not only the pleadings of the 
parties but also the evidence on record and has passed a reasoned 
judgment. There is no occasion for this court to enter into a finding of 
fact. He has relied upon judgement reported in 1994 AIR AP 134 
[Jupudi Venkata Vijaya Bhaskar -Vs- Jupudi Kesava Rao (died)], 
(para 30),  to submit that in the said judgement a reference has been 
made to the earlier judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court where it 
has been held that separate property of a member of joint Hindu 
family may be impressed with the character of joint family property if 
it is voluntarily thrown into the common stock with the intention of 
abandoning separate claim therein. 
Rejoinder arguments of the appellants in S.A No. 402 of 2016  
18. It was the specific case in the plaint that two brothers got 
property in their own name but at the same time it was pleaded that 
the property was acquired from joint family fund. The learned counsel 
submits that not only the existence of nucleus but also the sufficiency 
of nucleus is required to be proved as the income generated from the 
joint family property or joint family fund should be enough to sustain 
the acquisition of the property which is claimed to be joint family 
property in spite of standing in the name of Hindu nuclear family. He 
has again referred to the judgement passed by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court reported in (2003) 10 SCC 310  and has referred to the earlier 
judgments referred to by the Hon’ble Supreme Court at paragraph 10, 
11 and 13 to submit that mere existence of nucleus is not sufficient; 
adequacy of nucleus is also required to be proved. He has also referred 
to paragraph 5 of the plaint.  
The plaint  
19. Case of the plaintiffs as per the plaint is as under: -  
    
I. It was the case of the plaintiffs that upon death of the common 
ancestor, Gudru Gope, his sons jointly inherited the land in Khata 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
20 
 
No. 7 which became their ancestral joint family property in the 
hand of Girdhari Gope and his brothers (from 1 st wife) and Bhola 
Gope (from 2nd wife) – each were having equal share. It was their 
case that they were governed by  Mitakshara School of Hindu 
Law and the joint family property was never partitioned by metes 
and bounds either between the sons of Gudru Gope or amongst 
Girdhari Gope and sons of Bhola Gope and it was asserted that 
they were jointly cultivating the property as per convenience. 
After death of Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope, Girdhari Gope and 
Bhola Gope both became owners of 8 annas share  each (50% 
each). It was claimed by the plaintiffs (descendants through the 
2nd wife) that the defendants (descendants through the 1st wife) 
would be entitled only up to the extent of 50% of the property of 
Gudru Gope.  
II. Their further case was that after the last cadastral survey both 
Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope jointly and out of joint family 
fund, i.e., income from land of old Khata No. 7 acquired some 
more land by settlement from the then ex -landlord in their own 
names, which having acquired out of the lands of coparcenary 
property, became part of the joint family property. Later on, there 
was a minor revisional survey in the village during the lifetime of 
Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope and Girdhari Gope being the 
Karta of the joint family was looking after the survey proceedings 
which started in the year 1962 -63. The record of rights was 
finally published in the year 1967 in which new Khata No. 26 and 
28 was carved out from the old ancestral Khata No. 7 and the 
same was jointly recorded in the name of Girdhari Gope (one 
share) and three sons of Bhola Gope except Basudeo Gope [died 
prior to minor survey] having one share. In the column 2 of new 
Khata Nos. 26 and 28, the share of Girdhari Gope was entered as 
one share and th e share of the plaintiffs as one share, but 
Kabajwari of the plots as per the then possession was noted in the 
last or the remark column of the Khatiyans .  The lands which 
were jointly acquired by Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope from the 
joint family income was incorrectly recorded in the name of 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
21 
 
Girdhari Gope separately against new Khata Nos. 25 and 27 and 
for lesser areas, it was incorrectly and separately recorded in the 
name of Bhola Gope against new Khata Nos. 113 and 114, 
though both were joint owners having equal share.  
III. It was further alleged that Girdhari Gope was looking after the 
revisional survey being the Karta of the family and personally he 
had no objection to the entries made pursuant to the revisional 
survey nor did he press before the authorities the alleged 
compromise decree passed in Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938 nor 
did he file any objection and thereby allowed the Khatiyan entries 
to become conclusive, final and binding upon the parties. The 
alleged compromise decree was either non -existent or not acted 
upon or given effect to.  
IV. The ancestral land which was recorded under new Khata No. 26 
and 28 were described in schedule -B and the land which was 
subsequently acquired from joint family fund was recorded in 
Khata Nos. 25, 27, 113 and 114 and is described in schedule-C. It 
was asserted that the land of schedule -C was all coparcenary 
property being acquired from joint family funds and therefore, the 
Khatiyan entries were wrong and the plaintiffs had half share 
with respect to the schedule- C property.  
V. It was their further case that the parties were still joint and there 
has never been any partition by metes and bounds amongst them 
or amongst their ancestors and the rents were being paid jointly 
except with respect to the Khata Nos. 27, 28 and 114 which were 
‘Belagan’ land as entered in the Khatiyan of revisional survey of 
1967; meaning thereby, no rent was payable with respect to those 
properties.  
VI. Further case of the plaintiffs was that Bodhan Gope, S/o Girdhari 
Gope, prior to his death, had instituted Title Suit No. 148 of 1970 
and the present plaintiffs were defendant nos. 1 to 3 in the said 
suit whereas, three brothers of Bodhan Gope were defendant nos. 
4 to 6 in the said suit. In Title Suit No. 148 of 1970, Bodhan 
Gope sought a declaration of his title along with his three brothers 
over land comprising of certain plots under Khata No. 26 and 28. 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
22 
 
The claim was based on the alleged compromise decree of 
Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938 in which compromise petition was 
said to have been filed on 08.02.1939 by Bhola Gope (father of 
the plaintiffs). Further, a declaration was also sought in the said 
suit to declare that the survey showing the name of the present 
plaintiffs who were defendant nos. 1 to 3 in the Title Suit No. 148 
of 1970 in the purcha prepared and published with respect to the 
suit land of that suit, was wrong.  
VII.  It was also asserted that the plaintiffs of the previous suit 
admitted that the Khata Nos. 26 and 28 in the survey of 1967 was 
carved out of old khata no. 7 recorded in the name of common 
ancestor Gudru Gope and they also admitted that Girdhari Gope 
and Bhola Gope, each had equal half share in the lands of Khata 
No. 7 and also admitted equal share of the plaintiffs of the present 
suit on one side and the heirs of Girdhari Gope on the other side.  
VIII. The plaintiffs pleaded that the Title Suit No. 148 of 1970 was 
based on the compromise petition of the earlier Partition Suit No. 
25 of 1938 in which compromise petition was alleged to have 
been filed by Bhola Gope against Girdhari Gope and other co -
sharers whereby the suit lands, besides others, total 22 to 23 acres 
were allotted to Girdhari Gope and only 7 acres was allotted to 
Bhola Gope.  
IX. It was asserted that the defendant nos. 1 to 3 of Title Suit No. 148 
of 1970, who are the plaintiffs in the present suit, contested the 
said suit by stating that Bhola Gope never filed the alleged 
Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938 nor there was any compromise 
decree on the basis of alleged compromise petition and that the 
suit lands of Title Suit No. 148 of 1970, besides others, were 
never allotted to Girdhari Gope.  It was asserted that the said 
partition suit no. 25 of 1938 and its alleged compromise petition 
and the decree were manipulated, concocted, fabricated and not 
binding upon the present plaintiffs. 
X. In the Title Suit No. 148 of 1970, it was held, inter alia,  that 
compromise in the earlier suit being Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938 
was not arrived in the suit and the same was not acted upon and 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
23 
 
that the entry in the survey records -of-rights with respect to the 
suit land was not wrong or incorrect and accordingly, the suit was 
dismissed vide judgment dated 09.12.1971.  
XI. Against the judgment passed in Title Suit No. 148 of 1970, the 
plaintiff of the said case namely Bodhan Gope filed F.A. No. 8 of 
1972 which too was dismissed on 08.01.1975 by confirming the 
judgment of the trial court and holding that the alleged 
compromise was not signed by Bhola on behalf of his minor sons. 
XII. Thereafter, 2 nd appeal was filed before the High Court, but the 
order and direction of the High Court was not complied nor any 
steps were taken on behalf of the said appellants and the appeal 
before the 1 st appellate court was dismissed by an order dated 
21.12.1982. 
XIII. It was asserted that the final decision of Title Suit No. 148 of 
1970 dated 21.12.1982 proved that there was never any partition 
of the land of the suit Khatas which were coparcenary properties 
and the judgment in Title Suit No. 148 of 1970 became final, 
conclusive and binding upon the parties. 
XIV. It was their further case that defendant nos. 4 and 5 filed Title 
Suit No. 59 of 2004 on 03.08.2004 falsely stating that recorded 
tenants in survey of 1967 never constituted a joint family and 
Kabzawadi entries in the suit khata no. 26 were according to their 
individual rights and there was no unity of possession. It was also 
asserted in Title Suit No. 59 of 2004 that Doman Gope [died 
issueless] made a gift of his share to the said plaintiffs i.e., 
plaintiffs of Title Suit No. 59 of 2004 and delivered possession. 
The gift was alleged to be illegal and invalid by the present 
plaintiffs. 
XV. Further, the plaintiffs of Title Suit No. 59 of 2004 alleged to have 
sold some land [out of schedule -B of the plaint of this suit] but 
the alleged purchasers did not acquire any right except to claim 
partition from the share of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs of the 
present suit contested the said suit being Title Suit No. 59 of 2004 
and ultimately, an order dated 10.02.2005 was passed holding 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
24 
 
that the alleged compromise petition was not acceptable and the 
objection of the present plaintiffs was allowed. 
XVI. It was also asserted that in one Land Acquisition case certain 
properties in Khata No. 26 were acquired for military purpose for 
which compensation was awarded and paid. In the said case, the 
half of the amount of total compensation was paid to the 
plaintiffs. For the purpose of enhancement of the awarded 
amount, the case was pending in appeal before the High Court 
and therefore, the properties which were acquired did not form a 
part of schedule-B property seeking partition.  
XVII. It was asserted that in view of aforesaid series of litigations and 
various tactics of defendants and their ancestors at various stages 
of litigation to grab more land, the plaintiffs were advised to file 
the suit seeking partition of ½ share which was refused by the 
defendants on 05.08.2005. 
The written statement  
20. Case of the defendants as per the written statement is as under: -  
  
A. The genealogy appended at Schedule-A of the Plaint is neither 
correct nor complete. A dispute was raised with respect to the 
name of the family members and it was stated that Bhola Gope 
had died first among the brothers leaving behind three sons , 
Plaintiff no.1,  2 and 3. Basudeo , son of Bhola Gope had 
predeceased issueless. Bhondu Gope  and Mithu Gope [both 
full brothers of Girdhari Gope] also died issueless one after 
another. 
B. The common ancestor, Gudru Gope, during  his lifetime, 
divided the properties in equal three shares. One Jethans share 
to Girdhari Gope was allotted and 2/3rd share to three brothers  
i.e., Girdhari Gope , Bhondu Gope , and M ithu Gope  - sons 
through the 1st wife and 1/3rd share to Bhola Gope son through 
the 2nd wife was allotted and they continued in possession 
accordingly. Three brothers Girdhari, Bhondu and Mithu lived 
in reunion while Bhola lived in Separation. 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
25 
 
C. After death of the common ancestor, Bhola created nuisance  
and then Panches were called on Jyeth Sudi 14 Sambat 1975 to 
resolve the dispute  and they amicably resettled on the same 
right as per partition held amongst them and prepared a 
memorandum of the same in two copies –one each to two sets. 
After death of Mithu Gope and Bhondu Gope , the Sole 
surviving brother Girdhari succeeded them. It was admitted 
that t he shares of the two -brothers (died issueless)  devolved 
upon Girdhari Gope, but it was disputed that Girdhari became 
sharer to the extent of Eight annas  (50%) and Bhola became 
sharer of Eight annas (50%). 
D. It was denied that after death of Gudru Gope , the lands of 
Khata no.7 were the joint family property in the hands of 
Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope each having equal ½ share. It 
was stated that the joint family property was partitioned  and 
the partition held among them was later on merged into the 
Decree of Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938. 
E. It was denied that after last cadastral survey both Girdhari and 
Bhola, out of the joint Income from Khata no.7, acquired some 
more lands by settlement from the ex -landlord in their own 
names which became part of joint family properties. 
F. In the Partition Suit No. 25  of 1938 brought by Bh ola Gope, 
ancestor of the Plaintiffs, the lands allotted as per decree dated 
25.02.1938 were in Khata No.7 in different plots having total 
area of 7.31 acres as detailed in the written statement.   
G. It was denied that Girdhari Gope was ever the Karta of the 
joint family and was ever looking after the survey proceeding 
which started in 1962-63 and finally published in 1967. It was 
asserted that the original plaintiffs were instrumental in 
managing wrong entry in the Revisional survey record. It has 
been wrongly entered in the Revisional Khatian that Girahari 
Gope had one share and one share to original plaintiffs who 
had no concern with those lands of Khata no. 26 and 28.  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
26 
 
Taking advantage of the wrong entry the Plaintiffs tried to 
obtain Jamabandi in their names.  
H. The lands which were wrongly entered and transferred into 
new Khata and plots in Revisional Survey were detailed in 
para 19 of the written statement.  
I. Bodhan Gope, son of Girdhari Gope, the Ancestor of the 
defendants, lodged title suit no.148/ 1970 on 30/01/ 1970 and 
amongst others, prayed for  declaration that the recent survey 
showing names in the Parcha and publication by  survey 
authorities with respect to the above -mentioned land were 
wrong. The Title Appeal No. 8 /72 / 18/74 on remand by the 
High Court in S.A. No. 2/1975(R) is yet to be decided on merit 
as per observation made by the High court. Present suit for this 
reason too is not maintainable. 
J. It is incorrect to say that Girdhari Gope, by looking after the 
minor survey proceeding, got larger share incorrectly recorded 
in his separate name under New Khata no.25 and 27 and for 
lesser area in the names of the  ancestor of the Plaintiffs under 
new Khata no. 113 and 114. It was denied that both the 
Plaintiffs and defendants are joint owner having equal share. It 
is not correct to say that the compromise Decree of Partition 
Suit No. 25 of 1938 has not been given effect. 
K. It was denied that the lands of four Khatas i.e., Khata Nos. 25, 
27, 113 and 114  (all under schedule C property)  are 
coparcenary property and that they have been acquired out of 
joint family fund from schedule B property and accordingly 
they denied that the Plaintiffs have ½ share  in the lands of 
schedule 'C' of the Plaint. As a matter of fact, the plaintiffs and 
their ancestors have transferred the land, allotted to them 
through Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938  according to their 
Kabjawari allotment to different persons and to their wives and 
lady members of the family and the other lands of Khata Nos. 
113 to 114 were recorded in their name.  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
27 
 
L. It was denied that the parties are still joint. It was denied that 
Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope each had equal ½ share in the 
lands of old Khata no.7. 
 
21. Issues framed by the trial court :- 
 
I. Is the suit is maintainable as framed?  
II. Whether the plaintiffs have cause of action for the 
suit?  
III. Is the suit barred by res-judicata?  
IV. Whether the suit is barred under the provisions of 
Specific Relief Act? 
V.  Whether the suit has been properly valued and court 
fee paid is sufficient?  
VI. Whether the suit is barred by law of limitation and 
adverse possession?  
VII. Whether the suit is bad for non -joinder of necessary 
parties?  
VIII. Whether there is unity of title and possession between 
the parties as to the suit property? 
IX.  Whether the Schedule 'C' properties of the plaint are 
coparcenary of the plaintiffs and defendants?  
X. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to partition of half 
share in Schedule 'B' and 'C' of the plaint? 
XI. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to a decree prayed 
for?  
XII. To what other reliefs if any the plaintiffs are entitled? 
 
22. Oral and documentary evidences:- 
 
Both the parties adduced oral as well as documentary evidences in support 
of their respective cases. The plaintiffs examined altogether four 
witnesses. Out of them , PW-1 was Lato Gope, PW -2 was Birja Gope, 
PW-3 was Rato Gope and PW -4 was Prem Gope. The defendants have 
examined altogether five witnesses . Out of them , DW-1 was Umesh 
Gope, DW -2 was Ganesh Prasad Yadav, DW -3 was Indu Gope, DW -4 
was Mansa Gope and DW-5 was Devanand Gope.  
List of documents filed on behalf of plaintiffs:- 
 
Ext. 1 series Certified copy of Records of Right of Cadastral Survey of                                             
khata no. 25, 26, 27, 28, 113 and 114 of village Bujurga -
Zamira under Ramgarh thana, Dist. Hazaribag 
 Ext. 2  Certified copy of order dated 08.11.2011 passed by the 
High court of Jharkhand in W.P(C) No. 5948 of 2008.  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
28 
 
Ext. 3  Endorsement of District Land Acquisition Officer, 
Hazaribagh made on the petition filed by Rama Gope and 
others before the court of District Land Acquisition 
Officer, Hazaribagh in Case No. P-16/87-88. 
Ext. 4 Certified copy of order dated 05.01.1989, 07.01.1989, 
17.01.1989 and 23.01.1989 passed by District Land 
Acquisition Officer, Hazaribagh in Case No. 16/87-88. 
 Ext. 4/A Certified copy of order dated 10.02.2005 passed by the 
court of Munsif, Hazaribagh in Title Suit No. 59 of 2004. 
Ext. 4/B Certified copy of order dated 05.02.2009 passed by the 
court of Munsif, Hazaribagh in Title Suit No. 59 of 2004.  
Ext. 4/C Certified copy of order dated 21.01.2008 passed by the 
court of Munsif, Hazaribagh in Title Suit No. 25 of 1938. 
Ext. 5 Certified copy of plaint of Title Suit No. 148 of 1970 filed 
before the court of Munsif, Hazaribagh by Bodhan Gope 
as plaintiff against Rima Gope and others as defendants. 
 
List of Exhibits on behalf of Defendants:- 
 
Ext. A series:- 
(Ext.A to A/3) 
 Government rent receipt issued in the name of Devanand 
Gope and Girdhari Gope in respect of lands of khata no. 
25, 26, 27 and 28. 
Ext. B  Certified copy of order -sheet from 22.02.1938 to 
30.03.1984 passed in Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938 by the 
court of Munsif, Hazaribagh. 
Ext. B/1  Certified copy of order -sheet dated 18.09.1981 to 
21.12.1982 passed in Title Appeal No. 08 of 1972/02 of 
1981 by the court of 1st Addl. Subordinate Judge, 
Hazaribagh. 
Ext. B/2  Certified copy of order dated 17.07.2009 passed District 
Land Acquisition Officer, Hazaribagh in land acquisition 
case No. 5/03-04. 
Ext. C Certified copy of Judgement dated 09.12.1971 passed in 
Title Suit No. 148 of 1970 by the court of Munsif 
Hazaribagh. 
Ext. C/1  Certified copy of Judgement dated 08.1.1975 passed in 
Title Appeal No.  8 of 1972/18 of 1974 by the court of 1 st, 
Addl. Subordinate Judge, Hazaribagh.  
Ext.D  Certified copy of decree passed in Title Suit No. 148 of 
1970 by the court of Munsif Hazaribagh. 
Ext. D/1 Certified copy of decree passed in Title Appeal No. 8 of 
1972/18 of 1974 by the court of 1 st Addl. Subordinate 
Judge, Hazaribagh. 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
29 
 
Ext.D/2 Certified copy of Final decree passed in Partition Suit no. 
25 of 1938 by the court of Munsif, Hazaribagh.  
Ext. E Certified copy of sale deed dated 18.04.1979 executed by 
Lato Gope, Ram Gope and Bineshwar Gope in favour of 
Budhani Devi.  
Ext. E/1  Certified copy of sale deed dated 26.06.1990 executed by 
Lato Gope, Ram Gope and Binu Gope in favour of Atri 
Devi.  
Ext. E/2 Certified copy of sale deed dated 26.06.1990 executed by 
Rama Gope, Lato Gope and Binu Gope in favour of Parni 
Devi.  
Ext. E/3  Certified copy of sale deed dated 05.12.1992 executed by 
Doman Gope, in favour of Devanand Gope, Umesh Gope 
and Smt. Khema Devi. 
   
23. Findings of the learned trial court 
 
 Issue No. VIII (Unity of title and possession-Schedule 'B' lands):  
The learned trial court found no proof of partition between  Girdhari 
Gope and Bhola Gope .  The court noted that the Munsif in Title Suit 
No 148/1970 held that Partition Suit No. 25  of 1938 was not filed by 
Bhola Gope and no compromise was reached, and the prayer for a 
Final Decree in Partition Suit No. 25 of 1938 was not allowed even by 
the High Court. The plea of previous partition raised by the 
defendants by referring to Partition Suit No. 25  of 19 38 and also 
memorandum of partition (which was not exhibited) was rejected. The 
Court also found that “Kabjadari” does not indicate partition through 
metes and bounds.  It was recorded that the properties of Khata No. 26 
& 28 were not partitioned by metes and bounds . The Trial court 
concluded that there is unity of title and possession for Khata No. 26 
& 28 (Schedule 'B' lands). 
Issue No. IX ( Whether the Schedule 'C' properties are coparcenary 
properties) 
With respect to issue no. IX dealing with schedule -C property, the 
learned trial court recorded a finding in paragraph 48 that the plaintiffs 
have not been able to prove by good evidence that the land described 
in schedule - C of the plaint was coparcenary/joint family property. 
Paragraph 48 of the trial court’s judgment is quoted as under: 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
30 
 
“48. I find that except this statement of PW­1 there is no 
other evidence on the record to prove the facts that lands of 
khata no. 25, 27, 113 & 114 were acquired from the income 
of joint family. But PW­1 has not clarified that what was the 
income of the joint family, what was the expenses and what 
was the savings from which the lands of aforesaid khatas 
were acquired. Though, there is evidence that the family 
possess about 30 acres of lands. But there is no evidence on 
the record to show that what was the extent of income and 
expenditure and what was the savings of the joint family, 
because only after expenses, the amount which is saved is 
called the “nucleus” of the joint family. I find that a bald 
statement has been made in this regard in the pleading as 
well as evidence of PW­1. There is no case of the plaintiffs 
that karta of the joint family had acquired the lands in the 
name of different family members of joint family rather it is 
admitted fact that lands were acquired by Girhari Gope and 
Bhola Gope. Only because the family is joint, there can be 
no presumption that the property which has been acquired 
by a member of the family will be joint family property even 
though it is recorded in the name of that particular family 
member. I find that the plaintiffs have not been able to prove 
by adducing good and convincing evidence that there was 
joint family nucleus from which the lands of khata no. 25, 
27, 113 and 114 were acquired. I have stated above there is 
a bald statement that the property mentioned in schedule 'C' 
is joint family property. I also went through the record of 
rights of khata nos. 25 & 27 which have been recorded in 
the sole name of Girdhari Gope and khata no. 113 & 114 
recorded in the sole name of Bhola Gope. There is no 
material to show that the plaintiffs have raised any 
objection before the revenue authority in respect of the 
aforesaid wrong entry in the record of rights. In such view 
of the matter, I find and hold that plaintiffs have not been 
able to prove by good evidence that lands described in 
schedule 'C' of the plaint are coparcenary/joint family 
property. I further find and hold that there is no unity of title 
and possession between the parties with respect to the lands 
described in schedule 'C' of the plaint and as such the 
aforesaid lands are not liable to be partitioned. 
Accordingly, issue no. IX is decided against the plaintiffs.” 
      
Issue No. X (Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to ½ share in 
Schedule 'B' and 'C’) 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
31 
 
With respect to issue no. X, the learned trial court held that the 
plaintiffs are entitled to get ½ share in the lands described in schedule 
'B' of the plaint on partition. Whereas, lands described in schedule 'C' 
are not coparcenary/joint family property and not liable to be 
partitioned as claimed by the plaintiffs.  The findings are quoted as 
under: -  
“49. This issue relates to share of the plaintiffs in the suit 
property. In this regard, the case of the plaintiffs is that after 
death of Bondhu Gope and Mithu Gope rest two brothers 
namely Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope each became owners 
of 8 annas share in the lands described in Schedule 'B' of the 
plaint. Whereas the case of the defendants is that the branch 
of Girdhari Gope has 2/3 shares and branch of Bhola Gope 
has 1/3 share in the suit property. 
 
50. It is admitted fact that out of the four sons of Gudru 
Gope, two namely Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope died 
issue­less. According to the Hindu Law, their undivided 
interest in the coparcenary property devolved upon other 
coparcenars namely Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope by 
survivorship. Even if, at the time of death Bhondu Gope and 
Mithu Gope were separate their property passed to their 
heirs by succession. In that case also the share of Bondhu 
Gope and Mithu Gope devolved upon their other brothers 
namely Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope who were their heirs. 
As such, I find that Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope had 
half­half share in the lands of khata no.7 (new khata no. 26 
& 28). I further find that ancestor of defendants namely 
Bodhan Gope has himself admitted in the previously 
instituted Title Suit No. 148 of 1970 that Girdhari Gope and 
Bhola Gope had half share in the lands of khata no. 7 which 
is described in Schedule 'B' of the plaint. The certified copy 
of plaint of Title Suit No. 148 of 1970 has been got exhi bited 
on behalf of the plaintiffs and has been marked as Ext. 4/A. I 
find that the admission made in the plaint of Title Suit No. 
148 of 1970 by Bodhan Gope supports the claim of plaintiffs 
of this case that they have half share in the joint family 
property. Moreover, the record of rights of khata no. 7 (new 
khata no. 26 & 28) also describe equal share of the Girdhari 
Gope and Bhola Gope in the lands of said Khata. In view of 
the above facts and circumstances, I find and hold that the 
plaintiffs are entitled to get half share in the lands described 
in schedule 'B' of the plaint on partition. Whereas, I have 
already decided that lands described in schedule 'C' are not 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
32 
 
coparcenary/joint family property and not liable to be 
partitioned as claimed by the plaintiffs. Accordingly, issue 
no. X is decided and answered.” 
 
Findings of the 1st appellate court.  
24. On appeal filed by defendants with regards to schedule B properties 
for which partition was allowed ½ and ½ and cross appeal filed by the 
plaintiffs with regards to schedule C properties for which partition was 
declined, the learned 1 st appellate court allowed the cross appeal of the 
plaintiffs and dismissed the appeal of the defendants and consequently 
both, schedule B and Schedule C properties were to be divided ½ and ½. 
The defendants also argued that if the partition is to be allowed then the 
share of the plaintiffs would be only 1/4 th share of one son of the 2 nd wife 
and that of the defendant s would be 3/4 th (share of three sons of the 1 st 
wife) as the property would devolve equally amongst the four sons of 
Gudru Gope and upon death of two full brothers of Girdhari Gope , the 
property will only devolve upon Girdhari Gope being the full brother and 
not upon Bhola Gope.  The 1 st appellate court gave a concurrent finding 
that there is no proof of any partition between Girdhari Gope and Bhola 
Gope and the land in khata no. 26 and 28 have not been partitioned by 
metes and bounds and directed ½ share to the plaintiffs and upheld the 
findings of the learned trial court with regards to schedule B property. The 
learned 1 st appellate court recorded the question as to whether Girdhari 
Gope was entitled to 3/4 th share of the schedule B property but did not 
give any finding and simply held that plaintiffs and defendants would be 
entitled to ½ share each. No finding has been recorded as to whether the 
schedule B property was a coparcenary property or not although it was 
admittedly an ancestral property acquired by the common ancestor – 
Gudru Gope - the father of Girdhari Gope and also Bhola Gope.  The 
schedule C property was held to be falling under joint family property, but 
not under coparcenary property, and was directed to be partitioned ½ and 
½ between the plaintiffs and the defendants.  The defendants are in appeal 
against rejection of their appeal and also against cross appeal allowed by 
the 1 st appellate court.  The findings relevant for the purposes of 
answering the substantial questions of law are as under: -  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
33 
 
Paragraphs 21 to 24 of the appellate court’s judgement are quoted as 
under:  
  21. From going through the documentary oral evidence, I 
find that there is no proof of any partition between the 
Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope. 
22. Now the question arises whether Girdhari Gope was 
entitled for 3/4th share of the properties left by his father 
as per the doctrine of full blood and half blood, and 
Section 4 of the Hindu Succession Act is overriding effect 
on the Section 84 of the C.N.T Act and the Principal of 
Estoppel or admission as mentioned in para-3 of the Ext. 5 
is against the provision of statute. 
 23. The date, month or year of the death of Gudru Gope, 
Bodhu Gope and Mithu Gope as well as the wives of 
Gudru Gope has not been stated by any witness neither 
any document or substantive oral evidence has been 
brought. I am in agreement with the submission of the 
learned counsel of the respondent that share of a 
coparceners in the co -parcenary properties increases or 
decreases as per the variation in the family members. The 
counsel of appellant -defendant has stated that it is 
mentioned in the pleading as well as in the evidence that 
Gudru Gope in his lifetime divided his property in three 
equal share and one Jethan share was allotted to Girdhari 
Gope and 2/3rd share Girdhari Gope and his brothers 
born from the first wife and 1/3 to Bhola Gope. 
24. There is no any documentary and oral evidence to 
prove para-13 of the Written Statement. Although this fact 
has been stated by DW -1 in his affidavit -in-chief. DW -4 
Mansa Gope is a elderly man of village Bujurgjamira and 
he has stated that only two persons were allotted Jethans 
in his village namely Biglara and Namrata. He did not 
take name of Girdhari Gope and the second thing to be 
considered that if the Gudru Gope divided his property in 
three equal shares and one share was given to Girdhari 
Gope as Jethans and 2/3 of Girdhari Gope and his brother 
and one share to Bhola Gope, it is arithmetically wrong. If 
whole property is divided into three equal share and one 
share was given to Girdhari Gope as jethans, then only 
1/3rd share can be given to Girdhari Gope and his 
brother. Although, there is no evidence to prove the same. 
The defendant-appellant has relied upon the final Decree 
of Partition Suit No. 25/1938. However, from going 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
34 
 
through the documentary evidence, I find that the Court of 
Munsif has held that the suit was not compromised and not 
filed by Bhola Gope and the prayer for drawing final 
decree with respect to the partition Suit No. 25/1938 has 
not been allowed even by the Hon'ble Court. Hence, the 
Partition Suit No. 25/1938 could not be a basis of partition 
and the share of parties cannot be decided; since final 
decree has not been drawn neither 'dakhaldahani' has 
been effected. The learned lawyer of the appellant 
submitted that Ext. E series, the most vital documents of 
previous partition and these documents has been 
overlooked by the lower Court to consider the pleading of 
partition between the parties. I compared the lands sold by 
parties by Ext. E series are in consonance of their 
kabjabari for the Khatiyan vide Ext. 1 series. I find that the 
heirs of Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope sold of only those 
lands pertaining to Khata no. 26, 28 and 113 which are 
mentioned as kabzawari against their name in the 
Khatiyan. The judgment reported in 1995 got into JLJR 
1192 and vide para 22 of the judgment the effect of 
kabjabari(kabjadari) has been mentioned. I would like to 
mention only one line of the judgment as far as kabjadari 
is concerned "Kabjadari does not indicate partition 
through metes and bounds."  In the case in hand, the 
partition cannot presumed since separate kabjabari has 
been mentioned in the Khatiyan as well as there has been 
inte-rse transaction between the parties about the suit 
land. The learned lawyer of the appellant further raised 
matter of doctrine of merger. The principal of merger does 
not apply in this case since the judgment and order of the 
second appeal has not been brought on the record. 
Further, I find that Title Suit No. 148/1970 has been 
dismissed on merit and there is no any modified or reverse 
judgment of Appellate Court. Therefore, the principal of 
merger is not going to help the appellant anymore. 
Therefore, I find that the lands pertaining to Khata no. 26 
and 28 which are included in Schedule B of the plaint has 
not been partitioned by metes and bounds. Therefore, 
Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope are entitled equal half 
share to the lands of Schedule B' property. Therefore, the 
finding of the lower Court as far as Schedule 'B' property 
is concerned stands upheld.” 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
35 
 
Paragraphs 25 to 27 of the appellate court’s judgement dealing with 
cross appeal of the plaintiffs are quoted as under:-  
“25. Cross Appeal:  The learned lawyer of the appellant 
submitted that the finding of the issue No. IX and X are not 
correct and further emphasize that Ext. E series is an 
evidence of separate acquisition of property as well as 
allotment by 3/4 th share. From going through the contents 
of the plaint vide para 6, it is pleaded that lands belonging 
to khata  no.25,27,113 & 114 were jointly acquired by 
Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope and Girdhari Gope got 
recorded bigger area in his name vide Khata no.25 & 27 
and lesser area in the name of Bhola Gope under Khata 
no.113 & 114. Though, both were joint owners having 
equal share. In the Written statement vide para 21 & 22 of 
the written statement, the fact has been denied that lands 
of these four khatas are coparcenary property and that has 
not been acquired out of joint family fund. There is no 
pleading in the written statement that khata no.25 & 27 
were acquired by Girdhari Gope out of his personal 
income and a vague reply has been mentioned.  
 
26. The court below vide para 48 of his judgment has 
discussed the Issue and had concluded that there is no 
evidence that what was the income and expenditure and 
what was the saving of joint family because only after 
expenses the amount which is called nucleolus of the joint 
family. P.W. – 1 vide para 41 & 42 has stated that Khata 
no.25, 27, 113 & 114 were gairmajurwa and has been 
settled in the name of Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope with 
respect to the Khata no.25, 27 and 113, 114 respectively. 
Further, DW – 4 vide para 11 of his cross -examination 
has stated that Gudru Gope had his land vide Khata no.27. 
 
27. From the above statement, I find that the lands 
pertaining to Khata no.25, 27, 113 & 114 were not self -
acquired property of Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope 
rather it was jointly acquired by persons constituting a 
joint Hindu Family. There is no any separate income of 
the parties. The D.W – 4 has stated in his cross -
examination vide para 33 that Bhola pre -deceased 
Girdhari Gope and latter were looking after all the 
business of the family which further corroborate the 
pleading and statement of the plaintiff witnesses. D.W. – 4 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
36 
 
being the oldest witness and he has occasion to see even 
Gudru Gope and has attended the Shradh ceremony of 
Bodhu Gope and Muthu Gope appears to be most trusted 
witness on the facts pleaded by parties. Therefore, I find 
that the finding of lower Court as far as Issue No. IX and 
X are concerned stands set aside and it is ordered that 
Schedule ‘C’ land though does not fall under category of 
coparcenary property, however, it was a joint Hindu 
family property and is liable to be partitioned amongst 
parties between Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope by half 
and half.”  
Findings of this court.  
 
25. Before proceeding to decide the substantial question of law in the 
light of the facts of this case, it would be useful to refer to the provisions 
of law and the judgements cited by the learned counsel for the parties.  
26. Section 18 of the Act of 1956 is quoted as under: -  
“18. Full blood preferred to half blood - Heirs related to an 
interstate by full blood shall be preferred to heirs related by half 
blood, if the nature of the relationship is the same in every 
other respect.”     
27. A few provisions which have been cited by the learned counsel s from 
the book namely Mulla's Hindu Law 20 th Edition Volume 1  are as 
under:-   
Rule 28. INHERITANCE NEVER IN ABEYANCE (Page 102) 
(1)On the death of a Hindu, the person who is then his nearest 
heir becomes entitled at once to the property left by him. The 
right of succession vests in him immediately on the death of the 
owner of the property, Cannot, under any circumstance, remain 
in abeyance in expectation of the birth of a preferable heir, 
where such heir was not conceived at the time of the owner's 
death. 
(2) Where the estate of a Hindu has vested in a person, who is 
his nearest heir at the time of his death, he cannot be divested 
of a property, except either by the birth of a preferable heir 
such as a son or a daughter, who was conceived at the time of 
his death, or by adoption in certain cases of a son to the 
deceased." 
 
Rule 211. HINDU COPARCENARY (page 359) 
 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
37 
 
Hindu coparcenary is a much narrower body than the joint 
family. It includes only those persons who acquire by birth an 
interest in the joint coparcenary property. These are the sons, 
grandsons and great -grandsons of the holder of the joint 
property for the time being, in other words, the three 
generations next to the holder in unbroken male descent (See S 
217) The above propositions must be read in the light of what 
has been stated in the note at the top of this chapter. After the 
amendment of the Hindu Succession Act in 2005, a daughter of 
a coparcener has been included as a coparcener along with the 
sons of the coparcener . The commentary will now have to be 
read accordingly. 
 
To understand the formation of a coparcenary, it is important 
to note the distinction between ancestral property and separate 
property. Property inherited by a Hindu from his father, 
father's father or father's father's father, is ancestral property, 
Property inherited by him from other relations is his separate 
property. The essential feature of ancestral property is that if 
the person inheriting it has sons, grandsons or great -
grandsons, they become joint owner's coparceners with him. 
They become entitled to it due to their birth. These proposition s 
also must be read in the light of what has been stated in the 
note at the top of this chapter.  
 
Illustrations 
 
(a) Prior to the coming into force of the Hindu Succession Act 
1956, if A who had a son B, inherited property from his father, 
it became ancestral property in his hands, and B became a 
coparcener with his father. Though A as head of the family was 
entitled to hold and manage the property, B was entitled to an 
equal interest with his father A, and to enjoy it in common with 
him. B could, therefore, restrain his father from alienating it 
except in the special cases where such alienation was achieved 
by law, and he could enforce partition of it against his father. 
On his father’s death, B took the property by right of 
survivorship and not by succession.  
(b) ………… 
(c) …………. 
(d)………….Ancestral property is a species of coparcenary 
property. As stated above, if a Hindu inherits property from his 
father, it becomes ancestral in his hands as regards his son. In 
such a case, it is said that the son becomes a coparcener with 
the father as regards the property so inherited, and the 
coparcenary consists of the father and the son . However, this 
does not mean that coparcenary can consist only of the father 
and his sons. It is not only the sons, but also the grandsons and 
great-grandsons, who acquire an interest by birth in the 
coparcenary property.………. 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
38 
 
 
Rule 212. FORMATION OF COPARCENARY (Page 361) 
 
The conception of a joint Hindu family constituting a 
coparcenary is that of a common male ancestor with his lineal 
descendants in the male line within four degrees counting 
from, and inclusive of, such ancestor (or three degrees 
exclusive of the ancestor) . No coparcenary can commence 
without a common male ancestor, though after his death, it 
may consist of collaterals, such as brothers, uncles, nephews, 
cousins, etc. 
 
 Genesis of Coparcenary (Page 362) 
 
A coparcenary is created in the following manner A Hindu 
male A, who has inherited no property at all from his father, 
grandfather, or great-grandfather acquires property by his own 
exertions. A has a son B, B does not take any vested interest in 
the self-acquired property of A during A's lifetime but on A's 
death, he inherits the self -acquired property of A. If B has a 
son C, C takes a vested interest in the property by reason of his 
birth, and the property inherited by B from his father A, 
becomes ancestral property in his (Bs) hands, and B and C are 
coparceners as regards the property. If B and C continue joint, 
and a son Dis born to C , he enters the coparcenary by the mere 
fact of is birth. Moreover, if a son E is subsequently born to D , 
he too becomes a coparcener 
 
221. ANCESTRAL PROPERTY (Page 372) 
 
(1) Property inherited from paternal ancestor All property. 
inherited by a male Hindu from his father, father's father or 
father's father's father, is ancestral property. The essential 
feature of ancestral property according to Mitakshara law is 
that the sons, grandsons and great -grandsons of the person 
who inherits it , acquire an interest , and the rights attached to 
such property at the moment of their birth. Thus, if A inherits 
property, whether movable or immovable, from his father or 
father's father or father's father's father, it is ancestral 
property as regards his male issue……… 
 
………….. A person inheriting property from his three 
immediate paternal ancestors holds it, and must hold it in 
coparcenary with his sons, son's sons, and son's son's sons, but 
as regards other relations, he holds it, and is entitled to hold it 
as his absolute property. The result is that if a person inheriting 
property from another one of his three immediate paternal 
ancestors has no son, son's son, or son's son's son, the property 
is his absolute property, and no relations of his are entitled to 
any interest in it in his lifetime.” 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
39 
 
 
43. ORDER OF SUCCESSION AMONG SAPINDAS  
  …………………………… 
 Brother 
(a) Of the whole blood;  
(b) Of the half blood.  
Brothers of the whole blood succeed before those of the half 
blood. The half -brothers referred to here are sons of the same 
father by a different mother. Sons of the same mother by a 
different father are not entitled to succeed as ‘brothers.’ 
 
44. WHOLE BLOOD AND HALF-BLOOD  
 
(1) A sapinda of the whole blood is preferred to a spinda of the 
half-blood. This preference, however, is confined to sapindas of 
the same degree of descent from the common ancestor, it does 
not apply to sapindas of different degrees.  
……….. 
Thus, a paternal uncle of the whole blood is entitled to succeed 
in preference to a paternal uncle of the half blood, they being 
sapindas of the same degree of descent. However, a paternal 
uncle of the half-blood is entitled to inherit in preference to the 
son of a paternal uncle of the whole blood, the former being 
nearer sapinda of the deceased than the latter.” 
 
28. In the judgement reported in 1983 SCC Online Bombay 304 (Waman 
Govind Shindore v. Gopal Baburao Chakradeo) , it has been held in 
paragraph 13 that on a plain reading of the provisions of section 18 of the 
Act of 1956 , it appears to be clear that it is nothing but a substantial 
reproduction of the prevalent rule of Hindu Law under which relations of 
the whole blood were preferred to those of the half-blood if their degree of 
relationship to the deceased was the same. Section 18 provides for a 
preference of one category of heirs to another. 
29. It has been held in the judgement passed in the case of  Arunachala 
Gounder v. Ponnusamy, (2022) 11 SCC 520  that if a property of a male 
Hindu dying intestate is a self-acquired property or obtained in partition of 
a coparcenary or a family property, the same would devolve by 
inheritance and not by survivorship, and a daughter of such a male Hindu 
would be entitled to inherit such property in preference to other 
collaterals. 
 
 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
40 
 
 
 Substantial question of law no. (ii) as framed in S.A No. 393 of 2016 
(ii) Whether the courts below have misconstrued 
Section 18 of the Hindu Succession Act while 
dealing with Law of Succession regarding 
inheritance of the property of Gurdu Gope? 
30. This question is to be decided in the light of the aforesaid provisions 
and the judgments.  
31. The property of Gudru  Gope is in schedule B of the plaint. The 
admitted fact which has been recorded at paragraph 27 of the Trial Court’s 
judgment is that- 
a. Gudru Gope was the common ancestor of the parties who had 
acquired some lands in village Bujurg -Zamira under Ramgarh 
Thana of the district of Hazaribagh which were recorded in his 
name in the record of rights of last Cadastral Survey and 
Settlement under khata no. 7. 
b.  Gudru Gope had two wives.  
c. From the first wife, Gudru Gope had three sons namely 
Girdhari Gope, Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope. Out of them 
Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope died issueless.  
d. From the second wife of Gudru Gope, father of the original 
plaintiffs namely, Bhola Gope was born.  
e. The defendants are from the branch of Girdhari Gope whereas 
the plaintiffs are sons and grandsons of Bhola Gope.  
f. Lands of old khata no. 7, which were subsequently included in 
new khata no. 26 & 28 of revisional survey are ancestral 
property. 
32.  As per the Plaintiffs (descendants of Bhola Gope) , after the death of 
the Gudru Gope, his four sons jointly inherited the lands of old khata no. 
7, which became their ancestral joint family property in the hands of 
Girdhari Gope and his brothers and Bhola Gope, each having  an equal 
half share. They were governed by the Mitakshara School of Hindu Law, 
and the said joint family property was never partitioned by metes and 
bounds either between the sons of Gudru Gope or amongst Girdhari Gope 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
41 
 
and the sons of Bhola Gope, but they were cultivating some lands jointly 
and some lands separately according to their convenience. After the death 
of Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope, Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope both 
became owners of eight annas shareholders. 
33.  Said Gudru Gope had two wives. From the first wife, he had three 
sons: Girdhari Gope, Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope. Out of them, two of 
the sons namely, Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope died issueless, and their 
branches were extinguished and their shares devolved upon Girdhari 
Gope, who became shareholder to the extent of 8 Annas. From the 
wedlock of second wife, Gudru Gope had one son  namely, Bhola Gope, 
who became a sharer to the extent of  8-annas. The Plaintiffs stated that 
after Gudru Gope's death, his sons jointly inherited Khata No. 7, governed 
by Mitakshara School of Hindu Law, and the property was never 
partitioned by metes and bounds. 
34. With respect to schedule C properties, it was asserted that they were 
purchased from the earnings of joint family property i.e., schedule B 
property and were also required to be partitioned.  
35. As per the defendants (descendants of Girdhari Gope) , Gudru Gope 
had already divided his property into three equal shares during his 
lifetime: one ‘Jethans’ share was allotted to Girdhari Gope, 2/3 rd share 
was allotted to Girdhari Gope, Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope (sons from 
the first wife), and 1/3 rd share was allotted to Bhola Gope (son from the 
second wife). It was further stated that Girdhari  Gope, Bhondu Gope and 
Mithu Gope were joint, while Bhola Gope lived separately. 
It has been argued that a fter Gudru Gope’s death, Bhola Gope caused 
nuisance, leading to a village meeting on Jyeth Sudi 14 Sambat 1975. The 
dispute was amicably settled, and a memorandum was prepared, 
confirming the previous partition. After the death of Mithu Gope and 
Bhondu Gope, the sole surviving brother, Girdhari Gope succeeded them. 
The Defendants denied that Girdhari Gope became eight anna sharer and 
argued that Khata No. 7 was not joint family property. It was asserted that 
the earlier partition merged into the decree of Partition Suit No 25/1938.  
They contend ed that Partition Suit No. 25/1938 allotted 7.31 acres to 
Bhola Gope from Khata No 7. They allege d that Rama Gope and others 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
42 
 
wrongly influenced the revisional survey entries for Khata Nos 26 and 28 
(where 3.19 acres were wrongly entered), trying to obtain Jamaband i in 
their names. The Defendants den ied that Khata Nos. 25, 27, 113 and 114 
are coparcenary property acquired from joint family funds or that 
Plaintiffs have a half share in Schedule 'C' lands. They assert ed that the 
Plaintiffs and their ancestors have already transferred their allotted lands 
as per the 1938 partition. The Defendants argue d that there is no occasion 
for further partition, as it has already occurred.  
36. This court finds that  as per Rule 28 of Hindu Law by Mulla , on the 
death of a Hindu, the person who is then his nearest heir becomes entitled 
at once to the property left by him and the right to succession vests in him 
immediately on the death of the owner of the property and it cannot, under 
any circumstances, remain in abeyance. Thus, applying the aforesaid Rule, 
in this case, upon the death of Gudru Gope, his 4 sons immediately 
became entitled to 1/4 th share each. Thereafter, immediately upon the 
death of Bhondu Gope and Mithu Gope, two full brothers of Girdhari 
Gope, their 1/4th share each stood devolved/vested in Girdhari Gope (their 
full brother) and this is the position of law even as per section 18 of the 
Act of 1956.  
37. As per Rule 212 of Hindu Law by Mulla  a joint Hindu family 
constituting a coparcenary is that of a common male ancestor with his 
lineal descendants in the male line within four degrees counting from, and 
inclusive of, such ancestor and no coparcenary can commence without a 
common male ancestor. A coparcenary is always formed and started by a 
person who is receiving property from his father. It becomes ancestral 
property in his hands, and therefore his own descendants would acquire 
rights over the said property by birth as he forms as coparcenary with his 
descendants with respect to the property which he inherits from his father.   
38. Even under the Old Hindu Law, the law regarding inheritance 
amongst full blood and half blood was the same as Section 18 of the Act 
of 1956. Rule 43 of Mulla Hindu Law, 20th Edition, Volume 1 provides for 
order of succession amongst sapindas and the relevant portion which deals 
with brothers of whole blood and half -blood has been mentioned in sub -
clause 9. Brothers of the whole blood succeed before those of the half -
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
43 
 
blood. The half-brothers referred to here are sons of the same father by a 
different mother. Therefore, it shall appear that even prior to 1956, the 
prevailing Hindu Law provided that a brother of whole blood would 
succeed and be preferred before a brother of half-blood. In fact, section 18 
of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, only recognized and reaffirmed the 
said principle of old Hindu Law.  
39. There are concurrent findings by both the courts that there has been no 
previous partition in connection with the suit properties. There is no 
dispute that schedule B property was self -acquired property of the 
common ancestor Gudru Gope. With respect to the substantial question of 
law no.(i), the point would be whether schedule B would devolve through 
survivorship as coparcenary property or by succession.  
40. If it has to devolve through survivorship as coparcenary property, then 
upon death of two full brothers of Girdhari Gope, schedule B property 
would go into the hands of the surviving coparceners, that is, Girdhari 
Gope and Bhola Gope and their net share would be ½ and ½ over 
schedule B property. If it has to devolve through succession of joint 
family ancestral property, then upon death of two full brothers of Girdhari 
Gope, the 1/4th share of each deceased brother would go to Girdhari Gope 
being the full blood brother in terms of section 18 of the Act of 1956 and 
not to Bhola Gope being related by half-blood with the deceased.  
41. The schedule B property was admittedly self -acquired property of 
Gudru Gope. He was survived by his four sons, three from first wife, 
namely Girdhari Gope, Bhondu Gope, and Mithu Gope, but later two sons 
died issueless and only Girdhari Gope survived and one son from 1 st wife, 
namely Bhola Gope. Thus, after the death of the Gudru Gope, his four 
sons jointly inherited the lands of khata no. 7 (schedule B property) , 
which became their ancestral joint family property in the hands of 
Girdhari Gope and his brothers and Bhola Gope, each having equal share. 
Since the property was the self -acquired property of Gudru Gope he did 
not form a coparcenary with his sons with respect to his self -acquired 
property and accordingly, the schedule B property would devolve by 
inheritance through succession and not by survivorship.    
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
44 
 
42. The parties are governed by the Mitakshara School of Hindu Law, and 
the said ancestral joint family property in the hand of four sons of Gudru 
Gope was never partitioned by metes and bounds and plea raised by the 
defendants of previous partition has been rejected by the learned court. 
Since the schedule B property was ancestral joint family property and not 
a coparcenary property, the property immediately devolved by succession 
upon the four sons of Gudru Gope and would be a coparcenary property 
with respect to 1/4th share amongst descendants of each of the son as each 
son and his descendants would form a separate coparcenary amongst 
themselves. Since two full brothers of Girdhari Gope died issueless and 
the property in their hands did not acquire the status of coparcenary 
property, their share would devolve upon their full brother Girdhari Gope 
in terms of section 18 of the Act of 1956 and not to their half -brother 
Bhola Gope. Thus, Girdhari Gope would be entitled to 3/4 th share of the 
property of his father Gudru Gope and Bhola Gope would continue to 
have 1/4 th share as inherited from his father Gudru Gope by succession 
and would be ancestral joint family property in his hand and would 
acquire the status of coparcenary property only amongst him and his 
descendants.  
43. The 2nd substantial question of law as framed in S.A No. 393 of 2016 
is accordingly answered by holding that the courts below have failed to 
consider applicability of  Section 18 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956  
while dealing with Law of Succession regarding inheritance of the self -
acquired  property of Gurdu Gope in the hands of his four sons – three 
full brothers and one half brother and further regarding inheritance by 
succession upon death of two full brothers out of the three from the 1 st 
wife. Thereby the learned courts  have  failed to consider that the share 
of two  deceased full brothers would devolve upon their full brother , 
Girdhari Gope and not to half -brother Bhola Gope and consequently, 
Girdhari Gope  would be entitled to 3/4 th share in schedule B property 
and Bhola Gole would be entitled to 1/4 th share in the schedule B 
property. The findings of the learned courts that the plaintiffs and 
defendants would be entitled to ½ share each , is set aside. The 2 nd 
substantial question of law as framed in S.A No. 393 of 2016  is 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
45 
 
accordingly answered in favour of the appellants (defendants) and 
against the respondents (plaintiffs)  and it is held that the sons of Bhola 
Gope (plaintiffs) would be entitled to 1/4th share of the schedule B 
property and the defendants would be entitled to 3/4 th share of the 
Schedule B property.   
The 1st Substantial question of law framed in both the cases.   
(i) Whether the first appellate court has committed 
illegality in reversing the findings of the trial court in 
respect of issue no. 9 without discussing and giving 
reasons as to why first appellate court is reversing the 
aforesaid finding? 
44.    The learned trial court while deciding issue no. IX, as to  whether 
the schedule-C property [ Khata No. 25,27,113 and 114] is coparcenary 
property of plaintiffs and defendants observed in paragraph 48 of the 
judgment that except the statement of P.W. 1 (plaintiff no. 2) there was no 
other evidence on record to prove the fact that lands of Khata No. 
25,27,113 and 114 were acquired from the income of joint family and 
P.W. 1 had not clarified as to what was the income of joint family and 
what was its expenses and s avings from which the lands of the aforesaid 
khatas were acquired. The learned trial court also recorded that though in 
the evidence it has come that the family was possessing about 30 acres of 
land but there was no evidence on record to show as to what was the 
extent of income and expenditure and what was the savings of the joint 
family because only after the expenses the amount which is saved can be 
called the ‘nucleus’ of joint family. The court also recorded that it was not 
the case of the plaintiffs th at Karta of the joint family had acquired the 
lands in the name of different family members of the joint family, rather it 
was an admitted fact that the lands were acquired by Girdhari Gope and 
Bhola Gope. The learned Trial Court held that only because the family is 
joint, there can be no presumption that the property which has been 
acquired by a member of the ‘joint family’ will be ‘joint family property’ 
even though it is recorded in the name of that particular family member. 
The learned trial court was of the de finite view that the plaintiffs have not 
been able to prove by adducing good and convincing evidence that there 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
46 
 
was joint family nucleus from which the lands of schedule C [Khata nos. 
25,27,113 and 114] were acquired.  
45.  The learned trial court also recorded that even as per the record of 
rights, Khata No. 25 and 27 were recorded in the sole name of Girdhari 
Gope and Khata No. 113 and 114 were recorded in the sole name of Bhola 
Gope and there was no material to show that the plaintiffs raised any 
objection in connection with such entry in record of rights. 
46. The learned court ultimately held that the plaintiffs have not been able 
to prove by good evidence that the land described in schedule -C [Khata 
nos.25, 27, 113 and 114] were coparcenary/joint family property and held 
that there was no unity of title and possession between the parties with 
respect to the lands described in schedule -C [Khata nos. 25,27,113 and 
114] and ultimately held that the land in Schedule -C [Khata nos. 
25,27,113 and 114] were not liable for partition. Consequently issue no. 
IX was decided against the plaintiffs.  
47.  So far as the learned 1 st appellate court  is concerned, the point 
regarding schedule C of the property was taken up in cross appeal filed by 
the plaintiffs from paragraph 25 to 27. The learned 1 st appellate court 
recorded that it was pleaded in the plaint that Khata No. 25,27,113 and 
114 were jointly acquired by Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope and Girdhari 
Gope got recorded bigger area in his name by Khata No. 25 and 27 and 
lesser area in the name of Bhola Gope by khata No. 113 and 114. It was 
claimed by the plaintiffs that both were having equal shares and were joint 
owners of the property. In the written statement, it was denied that the 
aforesaid land in Khata No. 25,27,113 and 114 were coparcenary property 
and it was also stated that the property was not acquired out of joint 
family fund. The court also observed that there was no pleading in the 
written statement that Khata No. 25 and 27 were acquired by Girdhari 
Gope out of his personal income and a vague reply was given. The learned 
1st appellate court thereafter considered the findings of the learned trial 
court as recorded in paragraph 48 of the trial court’s judgment vide 
paragraph 26 of the 1 st appellate court’s judgment. The learned 1 st 
appellate court referred the evidence of P.W. 1 (the plaintiff no. 2) who 
stated in paragraph 41 and 42 that Khata No. 25,27,113 and 114 were gair 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
47 
 
majarua land and were settled in the name of Girdhari Gope with respect 
to khata no. 25 and 27 and  in the name of  Bhola Gope with respect to 
khata nos. 113 and 114. D.W. 4 in his cross examination has stated that 
Gudru Gope had his land in khata no. 27.  
48.  From the aforesaid materials, the learned 1 st appellate court was of 
the view that the lands in Khata No. 25,27,113 and 114 were not self -
acquired property of Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope, rather it was jointly 
acquired by the persons constituting a joint family. It was also observed 
that there was no separate income of the parties and D.W. 4 in his cross 
examination has stated that Bhola Gope had predeceased Girdhari Gope 
and Girdhari Gope was looking after all the business of the family which 
was further corroborated by the pleadings and statements of the plaintiff s’ 
witnesses. The court was of the view that D.W. 4 was the oldest witness 
and was most trusted witness on the facts pleaded by the parties. The 
learned 1 st appellate court ultimately held that Schedule -C land though 
does not fall under the category of coparcenary property, however it was a 
joint Hindu family property and was liable to be partitioned amongst 
parties between  heirs of  Girdhari Gope (defendants) and heirs of Bhola 
Gope (plaintiffs) by ½ and ½.    
49. The learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon the judgment 
reported in  1994 0 AIR (AP) 134 [Jupudi Venkata Vijaya Bhaskar -vs- 
Jupudi Kesava Rao (died) ] wherein it has been observed by referring to 
an earlier judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court that the separate 
property of a member of a joint Hindu family may be impressed with the 
character of joint family property if it is voluntarily thrown by him into 
the common stock with the intention of abandoning his separate claim 
therein. The separate property of a Hindu ceases to be a separate property 
and acquires the characteristic of a joint family or ancestral property not 
by any physical mixing with his joint family or his ancestral property but 
by his own volition and intention by his waiving and surrendering his 
separate rights in it as separate property. The necessary pre -condition for 
the application of the doctrine of Blending is the existence of coparcenary 
property as recognized by the Supreme Court in Mallesappa Ban-deepa 
Desai v. Desai Mallappa,  AIR 1961 SC 1268 that the doctrine of 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
48 
 
throwing into common stock inevitably postulates that the owner of a 
separate property is a coparcener who has an interest in the coparcenary 
property and desires to blend his separate property with the coparcenary 
property. In the said case there was no coparcenary property and the plaint 
schedule properties were alleged to be joint family properties and 
accordingly, the question of blending separate property with the 
coparcenary property did not arise. By mere declaration of status as 
"hindu Undivided Family", it could not be said that the party had blended 
his private properties with that of the joint family properties. 
50. In the judgement passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported in 
(2003) 10 SCC 310 [D.S. Lakshmaiah & Anr. vs. L. Balasubramanyam 
& Anr] which has been relied upon by both the parties, the question to be 
determined as is reflecting from paragraph 7 of the report was that as to 
who is required to prove the nature of property, whether it is a ‘joint 
Hindu family property’ or ‘self -acquired property’. In the said case the 
factual background to decide the point was stated in paragraph 8 of the 
report wherein it has been observed that there was evidence that the 
property in item no. 2 was joint family property but there was no evidence 
that the said property was yielding any income or that any nucleus was 
available with the aid of which  property in item no.1 could be purchased 
and there was no evidence to show the income from item 2 property or the 
value of the item 2 property  and at the same time no evidence was led to 
prove that the party had separate income to acquire item 1 property. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has considered numerous judgements including 
the following: -  
a. In Appalaswami v. Suryanarayanamurti [AIR 1947 PC 189 : 1947 
All LJ 587] the Privy Council held that as per Hindu law proof of the 
existence of a joint family does not lead to the presumption that 
property held by any member of the family is joint, and the burden 
rests upon anyone asserting that any item of property is joint to 
establish the fact. But where it is established that the family possessed 
some joint property which from its nature and relative value may have 
formed the nucleus from which the prop erty in question may have 
been acquired, the burden shifts to the party alleging self -acquisition 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
49 
 
to establish affirmatively that the property was acquired without the 
aid of the joint family property.  
b.  In Srinivas Krishnarao Kango  v. Narayan Devji Kango  [AIR 1954 
SC 379] the contention that was urged on behalf of the appellant was 
that the burden was wrongly cast on the plaintiff of proving that the 
acquisition of the properties were made with the aid of joint family 
funds as there were joint family properties to the extent of 56 acres 
and accordingly  it must be presumed that the acquisitions were made 
with the aid of joint family funds and, therefore, the burden lay on the 
defendants who claimed that they were self -acquired acquisitions to 
establish that they were made without the aid of joint family funds. 
The Hon’ble supreme court rejected the argument and held that only 
properties were proved  but there  was no satisfactory evidence about 
the income which th ose lands were yielding at the material time and 
the important thing  to be considered is the income which the nucleus 
yields and explained further by giving an example that a building in 
the occupation of the members of a family and yielding no income 
could not be a nucleus out of which acquisitions could be made, even 
though it might be of considerable value and on the other hand, a 
running business, in which the capital invested is comparatively small, 
might conceivably produce substantial income which may well form 
the foundation of the subsequent acquisitions. 
c.  In Mudi Gowda Gowdappa Sankh  v. Ram Chandra Ravagowda 
Sankh [(1969) 1 SCC 386] it was reiterated that the burden of proving 
that any particular property is joint family property in the first 
instance is upon the person who claims it to be so. But if the 
possession of a nucleus of the joint family property is either admitted 
or proved, any acquisition made by a member of the joint family is 
presumed to be joint family property. This is, however, subject to the 
limitation that the joint family property must be such as with its aid 
the property in question could have been acquired. It is only after the 
possession of an adequate nucleus is shown, that the onus shifts on to 
the person who claims the property as self-acquisition to affirmatively 
make out that the property was acquired without any aid from the 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
50 
 
family estate. The Hon’ble Supreme Court did not agree that only 
upon showing possession  of adequate nucleus the onus shifts and 
observed that while considering the question of shifting of burden, the 
important thing to consider is the income which the nucleus yields. 
d. In Baikuntha Nath Paramanik v. Sashi Bhusan Pramanik [(1973) 2 
SCC 334] the  Court again held that when a joint family is found to be 
in possession of nucleus  sufficient to make the impugned 
acquisitions then a presumption arises that the acquisitions standing 
in the names of the persons who were in the management of the 
family properties are family acquisitions. 
e. In Surendra Kumar  v. Phoolchand [(1996) 2 SCC 491] the  Court 
held that where it is established or admitted that the family which 
possessed joint property which from its nature and relative value may 
have formed sufficient nucleus from which the property in question 
may have been acquired, the presumption arises that it was joint 
property and the burden shifts to the party alleging self -acquisition to 
establish affirmatively that the property was acquired without the aid 
of the joint family funds. 
51. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in (2003) 10 SCC 310 (supra) ultimately 
held in paragraph 18 of the judgement that  there is no presumption of a 
property being joint family property only on account of existence of a 
joint Hindu family. The one who asserts , has to prove that the property is 
a joint family property. If, however, the person so asserting proves that 
there was nucleus with which the joint family property could be acquired, 
there would be presumption of the property being joint and the onus 
would shift on the person who claims it to be self -acquired property to 
prove that he purchased the property with his own funds and not out of 
joint family nucleus that was available.  
52. In the facts of the said case in (2003) 10 SCC 310 (supra) the Hon’ble 
Supreme court held in paragraph 17 of the judgement that the respondents 
of the said case having failed to discharge the initial burden of 
establishing that there was any nucleus in the form of any income 
whatsoever from Item 2 property and no other nucleus was claimed, the 
burden remained on the respondents to establish that Item 1 property was 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
51 
 
joint family property. The Court further recorded that in this view, the fact 
that the first appellant has not led any evidence to establish his separate 
income is of no consequence insofar as the claim of the respondents is 
concerned. Under these circumstances, for failure to lead evidence, the 
respondents' claim of Item 1 to be joint family property would fail as was 
rightly held by the first appellate court  in the said case before the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court . 
53. In the aforesaid judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme court itself, t he 
argument that even if assuming that the property was self -acquired 
property of the appellant but the appellant blended it with the joint family 
property and  therefore, it had become joint family property , was also 
rejected by observing that  the law on the aspect of blending is well settled 
that property separate or self -acquired of a member of a joint Hindu 
family may be impressed with the character of joint family property if it is 
voluntarily thrown by the owner into the common stock with the intention 
of abandoning his separate claim therein. It was observed that in order to 
establish such abandonment, a clear intention to waive separate rights 
must be established. It was also observed that from the mere fact that 
other members of the family were allowed to use the property jointly with 
himself, or that the income of the separate property was utilised out of 
generosity to support persons whom the holder was not bound to support, 
or from the failure to maintain separate accounts, abandonment cannot be 
inferred, for an act of generosity or kindness will not ordinarily be 
regarded as an admission of a legal obligation. A reference was made in 
the said case to the judgement of  Lakkireddi Chinna Venkata 
Reddi v. Lakkireddi Lakshmama  [AIR 1963 SC 1601: (1964) 2 SCR 
172] and  K.V. Narayanan  v. K.V. Ranganandhan  [(1977) 1 SCC 244]. 
 In the said case, the respondents did not lead any evidence on the 
aforesaid aspects and, therefore, it could not be held that the first appellant 
blended Item 1 property into the joint family account.  It was held that 
Item 1 property cannot be held to be joint family property and the 
judgement impugned was set aside and the judgment and decree of the 
first appellate court was restored by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in (2003) 
10 SCC 310 (supra) .  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
52 
 
54. Paragraph 48 of the learned trial court’s judgement is quoted as 
under:-    
“48. I find that except this statement of PW­1 there is no 
other evidence on the record to prove the facts that lands of 
khata no. 25, 27, 113 & 114 were acquired from the income 
of joint family. But PW­1 has not clarified that what was the 
income of the joint family, what was the expenses and what 
was the savings from which the lands of aforesaid khatas 
were acquired. Though, there is evidence that the family 
possess about 30 acres of lands. But there is no evidence on 
the record to show that what was the extent of income and 
expenditure and what was the savings of the joint family, 
because only after expenses, the amount which is saved is 
called the “nucleous” of the joint family. I find that a bald 
statement has been made in this regard in the pleading as 
well as evidence of PW­1. There is no case of the plaintiffs 
that karta of the joint family had acquired the lands in the 
name of different family members of joint family rather it is 
admitted fact that lands were acquired by Girhari Gope and 
Bhola Gope. Only because the family is joint, there can be 
no presumption that the property which has been acquired 
by a member of the family will be joint family property even 
though it is recorded in the name of that particular family 
member. I find that the plaintiffs have not been able to prove 
by adducing good and convincing evidence that there was 
joint family nucleous from which the lands of khata no. 25, 
27, 113 and 114 were acquired. I have stated above there is 
a bald statement that the property mentioned in schedule 'C' 
is joint family property. I also went through the record of 
rights of khata nos. 25 & 27 which have been recorded in 
the sole name of Girdhari Gope and khata no. 113 & 114 
recorded in the sole name of Bhola Gope. There is no 
material to show that the plaintiffs have raised any 
objection before the revenue authority in respect of the 
aforesaid wrong entry in the record of rights. In such view 
of the matter, I find and hold that plaintiffs have not been 
able to prove by good evidence that lands described in 
schedule 'C' of the plaint are coparcenary/joint family 
property. I further find and hold that there is no unity of title 
and possession between the parties with respect to the lands 
described in schedule 'C' of the plaint and as such the 
aforesaid lands are not liable to be partitioned. 
Accordingly, issue no. IX is decided against the plaintiffs.” 
  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
53 
 
55. The learned 1 st Appellate Court in para 26 recorded that the learned 
Trial Court in paragraph 48 of the judgment had concluded that there was 
no evidence as to what was the income and expenditure and what was the 
savings of the joint family because only after expenses, the amount which 
is called nucleus of the joint family can be arrived. The appellate court 
also observed that D.W.4 in his cross examination had stated that Gudru 
Gope (common ancestor) had his land vide Khata No. 27.  The learned 
appellate court in para 27 held that from the above statement of D.W -4, it 
appeared that the land pertaining to khata no. 25,27,113  and 114 were not 
the self-acquired property of Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope (both sons of 
Gudru Gope) rather they were jointly acquired by persons constituting 
joint family. The court then observed that there were no separate income 
of the parties and D.W -4 had stated in his cross examination that Bhola 
Gope had predeceased Girdhari Gope and latter was looking after the 
family business which corroborated the pleadings and the statement of the 
plaintiffs’ witnesses and found that D.W -4 was the most trusted witness. 
The finding of the trial court on issue no. IX and X were set -aside and it 
was held that though Schedule C property [ khata no. 25,27,113  and 114] 
was not coparcenary property, but was a joint Hindu Family Property.  
56. This Court finds that it was nobody’s case that Schedule C property 
[Khata Nos. 25,27,  113 and 114] were acquired by Gudru Gope rather it 
was the specific case of the plaintiffs that upon death of Gudru Gope the 
self-acquired property of Gudru  Gope [schedule B property]  devolved 
upon his sons and  Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope (both sons of Gudru 
Gope), who acquired  schedule C property from the joint family fund  
from schedule B property. Therefore, reference of cross examination of 
D.W-4 that Gudru Gope (common ancestor) had his land vide Khata No. 
27 has no relevance. The case of the plaintiffs was that Schedule C 
property was jointly acquired by Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope from the 
income of the properties of Schedule-B and therefore they were entitled to 
half and half share irrespective of entry made in the record of rights. It is 
not in dispute that Khata No. 25 and 27 was recorded in the name of 
Girdhari Gope and Khata No. 113 and 114 was recorded in the name of 
Bhola Gope. This court finds that though there is a finding of the learned 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
54 
 
1st appellate court that there is no separate income of the parties, but there 
is no finding that there was a nucleus, much less adequate/sufficient 
nucleus in the joint family from schedule B property [no other property of 
the family has been referred] so as to enable Girdhari Gope and Bhola 
Gope to acquire Schedule-C property. It was nobody’s case that there was 
joint family business from which schedule C property could be acquired 
which could partake the character of joint family property and other wise 
also there is no material regarding income from such business much less 
sufficient income to constitute adequate nucleus to acquire schedule C 
property. Further , there is neither any pleading nor any finding that the 
properties acquired by Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope (both sons of 
Gudru Gope) were thrown into the joint family and thereby they 
constituted joint family property.  
57. The learned 1st appellate court has completely misdirected itself in law 
in the facts of this case while holding that schedule C was Joint family 
property inspite of the fact that  the initial onus was upon the plaintiffs to  
prove that the schedule C property was acquired jointly by Girdhari Gope 
and Bhola Gope (both sons of Gudru Gope) from the joint family fund 
arising from joint family property of schedule B and that there was 
sufficient nucleus constituting joint family find to acquire the schedule C 
property. This onus was never discharged by the plaintiffs.   In such 
circumstances, the onus never shifted upon the defendants to prove the 
source of fund to acquire the property of khata  no. 25 and 27 [part of 
schedule C property] which was recorded in the name of Girdhari Gope. 
This court finds that the learned 1 st appellate court has failed to meet the 
reasons of the learned trial court who held in para graph 48 of the 
judgment that there was no evidence of nucleus in the joint family to 
acquire schedule C property and the trial court held that the same was not 
liable to be partitioned.  
58. This court is of the considered view that the present case with respect 
to schedule C property is squarely covered by the judgement relied upon 
by the parties reported in (2003) 10 SCC 310 (Supra), but in favour of the 
appellant (defendants) and against the respondents (plaintiffs).  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
55 
 
59. This court finds that the plaintiffs failed to prove that schedule C 
property was joint family property and consequently this Court holds that 
the khata no s. 25 and 27 having been recorded in the name of Girdhari 
Gope (defendants) and Khata No. 113 and 114 having been recorded in 
the name of Bhola Gope (plaintiffs) were their individual properties  and 
cannot be termed as their Joint Family Properties .  Though the defendants 
had not stated that they had purchased the Khata No. 25 and 27 out of 
their personal income but they had clearly denied that stand of the 
plaintiffs that the lands in schedule C were acquired out of joint family 
fund. In such circumstances, the onus was upon the plaintiffs to prove that 
there was nucleus in the form of an income from Schedule-B property to 
acquire Schedule -C property. The initial burden of establishing nucleus 
and also sufficiency of  nucleus in the joint family to show that schedule -
C property could be  acquired from the income of other joint family 
property (schedule B)  did not shift upon the defendants and merely 
because the defendants did not specifically plead that Girdhari Gope had 
separate income and had not proved that Girdhari Gope had separate 
income to acquire  the lands in  Khata No. 25 and 27 which is a part of 
Schedule-C property , is of no consequence. It was enough for the 
defendants to plead that the schedule -C property was not acquired out of 
joint family fund. The plaintiffs in the present case have failed to 
discharge their onus when seen in the light of the judgment passed by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court reported in (2003) 10 SCC 310  (Supra), the 
finding of the learned 1 st appellate court with respect to issue no. ( IX) is 
perverse and consequently , the finding of the learned 1 st appellate court 
that Schedule -C property was a joint family property liable to be 
partitioned between Girdhari Gope and Bhola Gope by ½ and ½ is also 
not in accordance with law. Accordingly, it is held that the learned 1 st 
appellate court had committed illegality in reversing the finding of the 
learned trial court in respect of issue no. (IX) and the judgement of the 1st 
appellate court has been passed without discussing and giving reasons, 
much less adequate and acceptable reasons as to why the 1 st appellate 
court was reversing the aforesaid finding.  
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu

2025:JHHC:35111 
56 
 
The 1 st substantial question of law is accordingly decided in favour of 
the appellants (defendants) and against the respondents (plaintiffs).  
60. As a cumulative effect of the aforesaid answers to the substantial 
questions of law in favour of the appellants(defendants), the finding of the 
learned 1st appellate court with respect to schedule C property is set -aside 
and the finding of the learned trial court with respect to schedule C 
property is upheld. Further, the finding of the learned trial c ourt with 
regards to ½ and ½ share in schedule B property, which was upheld by the 
learned 1st appellate court, is set-aside by holding that the defendants and 
the plaintiffs would be entitled to share of ¾: ¼   instead of ½: ½ with 
respect to schedule B property.  
61. These 2nd appeals are accordingly allowed in the aforesaid terms. 
62. Office to prepare decree accordingly. 
63. Pending interlocutory application, if any, is dismissed as not pressed. 
64. Let this judgment be communicated to the learned court concerned 
through ‘FAX/email’. 
  
       (Anubha Rawat Choudhary, J.) 
Date of judgment 25.11.2025 
Pankaj/Binit 
Date of uploading: 26./11/2025 
| Printed using casemine.com by licensee : Usha Sahu